## [ORDINARY SECTION]

# Ordinary States

---

### Three Bodies

All people experience a host of minor ordinary States, but there are three Major States (or realms, or bodies) of consciousness that we enter every day: **Waking, Dreaming,** and **Deep Sleep.** Those States where you are ordinarily unconscious can be accessed through spiritual practice, exposing entire realms of deep meaning and revealing transcendent modes of knowing and being. The realm, or embodiedness, of REM dream states is called Subtle, and this includes lucid dreams and similar phenomena. Likewise, Causal States take place in a realm of total emptiness prior to time or the manifestation of form, and resemble NREM deep sleep, with self-reflecting conscious (Witness) being the only content. What we call Gross States are all States like this one - where you are in a physical body in this physical world, and you cannot leave your body or fantasize anything into being. There is a persistent feeling of disconnectedness, desperation, lostness, and not having or being enough. Using waking States to access Subtle and Causal States is recognized in meditative traditions to cure this ailment in a certain sense by creating a long term sense of Oneness and harmony with all of creation and with the flow of time. These States are called Nondual, final enlightenment, integrating all three realms into a single conscious experience.

### Waking

For almost all adults, waking consciousness takes place in the Alpha and Beta brainwave range, or Gross realm. Transcendental spiritual states are only accessed at random and very infrequently. Consciousness is lost in nearly all stages of sleep. Obviously, this does not mean that our reality lacks for variety. In Waking consciousness, we find States ranging from boredom to elation, rage to agony to bliss to embarrassment to intellectual overdrive. It is terribly important to realize, like the existentialists and psychoanalysts, that our dreaming mind and our causal consciousness play an invisible role in constructing our self and our reality, influencing all waking State experiences behind the scenes. Integral Spiritual work encourages Waking Up to all three realms, including being more awake and participatory in Waking states. We may also discuss **Non-Ordinary** or Altered States, which could include rare States caused by extreme challenge, or by intoxication. Entheogens can help a person access altered States which may run parallel to or expose themm to Subtle and Causal States. Some people consider these plants and fungi both "medicine" and "teacher" (of spiritual States.) The Integral perspective is typically to recognize that entheogens play a sort of "gateway" role in accessing spirituality, and may be used for long term Waking Up therapies. We also stress that our most recommended paths to Spirit are non-entheogenic routes, as we feel that quality meditative practice very quickly gets a person to deeper and much purer (but perhaps less exciting) endogenous transcendental States than the chemical path would typically yield in a similar time frame. I'm going to sound like a broken record here, but we need Integral methodology to connect good science being done on spiritual States (which is scant but ever improving) with goo science being done on entheogens (often illegal.) Integral includes psychedelia as one of many paths.

### Dreaming

For most people, dreams are like the great vast ocean sprawling endlessly from their coastal town. What's out there? Who knows. Probably a whole lot of nothing. But the sailors know. We may feel that dreams tell us nothing. Dreams don't matter. They don't "really" happen. It doesn't matter what happens in a dream. It's all in your head. When we consciously dream, we are inhabiting a world of the mind's creation, in an imaginary body. Whatever is there, and whatever happens, is because an unconscious, invisible part of yourself is putting it there right now. Isn't that intriguing? Look that thing right in the eye. Let it terrify you. It doesn't matter, right? Everything that happens here is just yourself. These buildings, these other people, it's all You. Are you not the slightest bit curious who this other person is, living in the hidden places of your mind? Well, this is them talking to you. This stuff is all here for a reason. You are finally communicating with your entire Self. We may deepen this relationship in many ways. We can analyze our dreams, searching for puns and clues and hints, and they sure are in there. That invisible person is a genius. It's a real puzzle, and everything is significant. Have you ever just asked that person to come out? Go into a dream and say you want to talk to them. What will happen? We may pursue lucid dream practices and various other forms of sleep meditation, so that we can be more stable, present, and in control. We may also take on meditative practices, which can incude dreams from the waking state (generally sitting, but also Psychic States which blend Subtle and Gross.) Ultimately, we may recognize the dream work as Subtle State practice, and this may inspire us to pursue even deeper practices, which bring the consciousness or awakeness into a space even beyond the dreaming mind. The dream rolls away to total empty nothingness, and you're the only thing still here. You are the emptiness.

### Deep Sleep

It may be difficult to imagine this seeming paradox of being totally awake and totally asleep at the same time (and keep in mind this is not easy stuff to put into words!) Consider this wonderful analogy: when we are fully asleep, we say we are "unconscious." We are not awake, alert, or present, but if someone comes and kicks you, you wake up. Someone was awake enough that they can be roused by commotion. If you are unconscious you can't hear or feel anything. Even in deep sleep, you are awake enough that you continue breathing, and moving through sleep cycle stages, and you might even move around "unconsciously." So yet again, we have an "invisible" person living inside our mind. Somebody is listening for the alarm to go off. Imagine being that somebody. It's just listening to silence, feeling nothing. It's the cells in your brain just being alive and saying you are here. In deep sleep, we are Delta consciousness, just pure listening to silence, seeing nothing. You spend a lot of time paying attention to this, and it occurs to you that this never goes away. This is all there is. It's just the consciousness. And then the dreams and the symbols and the Subtle body, *that invisible guy,* and then the real body comes back and here's the world again, and I'm laying in bed or sitting on my mat, and I remember all the stuff in the "real" world. The whole time, it's still just that Witness. That's all there is. It's in space. It's in that other person, in the crickets, in the rain. All there is is just looking at it. It's always just the Witnessing of itself. If something terrible happens, you can always just roll right back out, to the beginning, to before anything existed, and you've changed nothing. Just shut the game off because you're finished with it. Oh, but you aren't finished with it. Why would you be? Because You are just the self-aware space of the kosmos. You are attached to nothing. We enter this world and we play the kosmically-informed part that we play, because it is our choice, because just imagine if more of us understood this? Imagine the suffering that could be saved, and the joy that could be had. In the relative world, that goes away from the lights switch off. Where the only certainty is negative outcomes from attachment. Imagine if it was entirely, entirely your unpressured, abstract choice to be here. You could be free, but you love people, and it would be funny if your whole deal was that you teach this because you love them. You can reveal that all three realms resonate together to create this moment, and they can be visible, and you can be free. Integral culture creates a space for these Subtle and Causal bodies (perhaps your literal soul and Spirit.) Crazy people talk about this, but this is not crazy. This is Integral Spirituality. 

## [BRAINWAVES SECTION]

# Brainwave States

---

There is a strong desire for transpersonal mystical States to provide scientific backing. One measure which is evident and easily comprehensible is EEG (electroencephalography). We can explore Branwave ranges and how they correspond to Major Ordinary States of consciousness, and also how those might correspond to an overlapping comparitive religious progression of milestones along the path of Waking Up.

### Frequency Ranges

We can generalize electrical brainwave activity into bands of frequency. The Beta band is characteristic of alert, high energy activity. Alpha States are relaxed, able to step back and look at the bigger picture, calm and ambivalent. Most of us are only conscious as Alpha and Beta patterns. We act as Ego and Personalities in an objective world, or Gross realm. There are forms of intelligence that seem to be produced by faster waves, particularly various forms of social fluency. As a rule of thumb, more intelligent thoughts come from slower brainwaves. The unpressured mind is able to make outstanding connections, and visualize and concretize enormous abstractions with an intuitive sense of clarity. Theta patterns, accessed through practice and conscious dreaming, introduce visionary fantasy, disembodiedness, structural dissolution and creation. There are also other relevant brainwave ranges, including Gamma, but I feel we lack the research and understanding to positively include them in this model. Extremely advanced meditation practices, often focused on compassion, produce these faster patterns, which otherwise only occur in intense or extreme circumstances. More consistently, we see a Delta pattern, the slowest waves, or near-total cessation of activity, in other highly advanced forms of meditation accessing Causal States.

### BETA

During the day when we take care of responsibilities, we use the awake, alert, responsive, productive Beta range. These brainwaves consume high energy, and can lead to stress, depletion, and poor health. We require rest or else we'll start talking about Gamma waves!

### ALPHA

In a mellow, restful, or playful state of mind, we show more Alpha range. Deeper in this range, we reach the edge of sleep (hypnagogic state). Alpha is absorptive, synthesizing, and creative. Sometimes, to solve a problem, you just need to take a break.

### THETA

Early meditation trials showed meditators entering Alpha brain states, but it was discovered that more advanced meditators get into Theta ranges. These are brainwaves that dominate the dream state and show up more heavily in children. A Theta waking state is indicative of access to Psychic (and possibly Subtle) States. Most of us only experience Theta while dreaming, and tend to sleep through or forget our dreams, which happen several times a night for almost everyone. Most of us have scant dream recall and few or infrequent lucid dreams. This is normal. Some of us lucid dream every night and approach Theta states with the same awareness and recall that we have throughout the day. Lucid dreams by night and Psychic States by day tend to coarise. This is the Level of Identity as Psyche. It's the ultimate character of the relationship between everything Ego does and doesn't know. Sweetest dreams and worst nightmares, treasures and dragons. It is uncommon for a person to believe in or take seriously this very real and fundamental fact of human life. Those who do should be called spiritual, or nature and deity mystics, in an Integral sense. In these individuals, neglect of Personality and Ego (Shadow) are also common. At this level of practice, serious Shadow work, with assistance, is highly recommended.

### DELTA

The baseline hum of sentient living being. We experience a small amount of Delta (all by itself) when we are in deep dreamless sleep. Totally unconscious. The most advanced meditators in particular traditions (and also Ken Wilber) can display the ability to consciously access pure Delta States while still awake and aware. This appears to be the physical basis of what is commonly called spiritual enlightenment, nondual union, or transcendence. To experience Consciousness itself, without any forms or content or anything, is to see the truest and deepest version of yourself, and also the world, as One. You and every other living being are identical at this level, thus the actual nature of yourself is that you are the Universe. This core exists before anything, always, no matter what happens to a person, or everyone, no matter what happens in the story, this thing is simply here, watching. Those who experience constant consciousness through waking, dreaming, and deep sleep, every day, realize every Level, awake or at least present, all the time. This Nondual being is considered full enlightenment, or the "fourth state", turiyatita. To describe this sort of thing in plain language completely fails to convey States that take decades for very dedicated experts with help to access if they are lucky. Words do not impart what it is to vibe with the entire cosmos and perceive the oneness of all existence, but what we hope to convey is that this is not mere mystical speculation. It has been observed and reported all throughout the world, throughout history. It may be interpreted countless ways, but this is real. 

## [SELVES SECTION]

# Self Affinity

---

As a transcendental mystic accesses higher States and State realms, it is common to experience changes to the sense of self and identity. We are identifying more and more with the embodiedness of the higher State. Ultimately, the goal of Integral spiritual practice is to fully become, or integrate, the deepest realms of embodiment, without abandoning any. At this point, the State has become a stage, or state-structure, or state-stage (come on, Ken). If the individual is interpreting the State through Turquoise, we can consider these higher State identities as Levels Indigo, Violet, Ultraviolet, and Clearlight (Altitudes corresponding to Psychic, Subtle, Causal, and Nondual state-structures.) Here, we standardize these shifting State identities into common, non-religious wording which intuitively line up with the Brainwaves and Spiritual States.

### SELF 1: PERSONALITY

Typical children and those up to Amber identify with Personality. The personality is a character that you play right now to get things. Children have no self-monitoring, so they are pure personality. Much of their work is to gain self-awareness in order to understand and control their impulsivity. As adults, we use personalities in the roles that we play to fulfill our responsibilities. If overused, a person can start to feel selfless or ungrounded. Being pure personality as an adult is not well tolerated, generally considered a regressed development or personality disorder.

### SELF 2: EGO

Ego or I is a self-aware, reasonable agent. It understands its motives, it loves and hates and respects and tolerates, it governs the use of personalities, and it is ever focused on the way that it is perceived, appreciated, and responded to by others. Ego is neither good nor bad. Ironically, Ego is the judge of that. Ego is the controller of Personality. Our concept of adulthood generally describes prevalent, healthy ego. Nevertheless, this is another functional construction, and the problem of ego is that it mistakes itself for the actual Self, or the whole of comprehended reality, which is found at deeper identities.

### SELF 3: PSYCHE

The Psyche is the total mind, and can be experienced as a sense of identity as all that is arising, and all that is unseen. Disruptions in the psyche, originally called hysteria and psychosis, are the visible symptoms of mental illness, so psychologists such as Freud and Jung attempted to map and comprehend its intricate depths. As you gain awareness of how the Psyche functions, you see that it is the source of concepts and feelings and even your imaginary concepts of other people's internal realities. It is your style, your dreams, and your soul. A person who begins to identify as Psyche, or is Psyche-aware, having Psychic States of consciousness, has fairly direct consciousness of their own process of constructing reality. The Psyche is senior to Ego. It contains and constructs Ego. It is a deeper, more true version of the self. It includes more of the subconscious and unconscious, and an awakened holistic view of this moment. Through this lens, we may learn to access the depths of Subtle realms, and experience the totality of reality as a manifested diety, showering you in the glory of your own buried treasure. This is the truest experience of form, to inhabit the root archetypes which blossom into the story of your life and the history of creation.

### SELF 4: CONSCIOUSNESS

There is one thing that is always here, whether we are waking, dreaming, or sleeping. That is consciousness. How do you know to wake up when someone kicks you? Something is awake, listening, and that's actually you. A witness to this everything. Witnessing the simple nondual feeling of being. Common to all sentient creatures, ever birthing and evolving forms. I Am, you are, and we have always been the creator of the Universe. It is being us, you, and I. We are the self-aware physical matter of Big Bang, the singing and dancing planet Earth, the history of Mind. If you could spend eternity in utter infinite formless nothingness, you would come to be and live and evolve and Wake Up this reality. And so it is. The Simple Feeling of Being is common to all moments, even unconscious. This is the deepest core of yourself and everything, your true identity. The Self.

### The Consensus Trance

We cannot access higher affinities or coordinations of the mind as long as we continue to identify with the lower. We are conscious of a person, constructed into a person, viewing through a person, receiving feedback. We have learned and coordinated through training to never access States of utter freedom and bliss, creative brilliance, weeping joy, and other-worldly visions. Society reinforces this "Matrix," not as a deliberate mental prison, but simply because so few of us recognize the signficance of States that we are more or less culturally blind to them.

### Trans-Rational Mysticism

Integral provides a mono-mythic, universal donor theory of States and recommends meditation for the practice of Waking Up. State practices are available to all people, not just the religious or dead. These classically spiritual states of consciousness will become more commonplace as spirit unfolds, and will produce new stages of human development. Religion and romantic idealism view spirituality as a thing of the past that we have lost through corrupting development. Integral sees the past for what it was, Levels, and enlightenment as a future evolutionary potential. Looking back through history, it seems these spiritual States have driven much of the civilization of our world. 

## [SPIRITUAL SECTION]

# Spiritual States

---

In this model, we are specifically talking about a generalized progression of State-stages, that is, stages of States, classically achieved through spiritual practice, typically meditation. Each of these States can be thought of as a Body, or Realm, as they entirely occupy your sensory experience and awareness while you are practicing successfully. Transcendental States can be experienced by anyone at any time, but to acquire them as Traits, or to be able to access the State at will at any time, requires a very intense effort to achieve. Each is experienced as a sort of reversal to the rules and the nature of reality. Each is often described as an epiphany, a communion with a higher identity or being, often intense, harsh, terrifying, disruptive, but nevertheless resulting in the person feeling as though they have awoken from a dream into a greater reality, that they are able to face everything they were never able to face before, that this experience was intensely life changing and impactful.

### GROSS

This is our typical awareness. Our body. The material environment. Our personal concerns and worries, our stories, our people of interest. Our work. Our activities. Our stories. All the stories that everybody has. This is the gross realm, or State.

### PSYCHIC

Not to be confused with paranormal abilities, it means psyche-aware. At this point, a person may maintain bodily thought and awareness, but a sort of daydreaming causes them to identify more with consciousness and their total holistic and ideological environment. If Psychic States are practiced regularly, a person becomes considerably more lucid, they may display forms of genius and high vulnerability. Psychic States, as the gateway to deeper practices, can be shocking, startling, and terrifying. They can lead to re-traumatization experiences, bizarre bodily phenomena, and general spooky stuff.

### SUBTLE

The Subtle is an entire realm of pure mind. One way to hypothetically describe this state is that it is like dreaming while fully awake. Both parts are on at once. It takes a long time to enter, discover, and maintain these States. This is deep into the practice. A person who spends a lot of time in Subtle States is psyche-aware. They are self-aware of how their reality is constructed by stories and memes, or archetypes.

### CAUSAL

This is the most-Subtle, or Causal, body or State realm. A person in this State will show practically no Beta or Alpha brainwaves, and they will describe dropping out of body and mind and becoming the pure essence of reality itself. This is the typical form of spiritual enlightenment, ultimate oneness, gnosis, or godhead. The self truly sees, once and for all, that it is nothing else besides the self, looking at the self. The Witness. No matter what happens, this is here, everywhere, forever. I am this. Infinite. Empty. Everything and everybody you know, every story, this whole dang thing is You. You crawled out of the ocean, you set this whole thing up. Its very funny. It is definintely not words, though, and it is definintely not knowledge. Talking about it is only an attempt to point out, or translate, one State from within another.

### NONDUAL

It's always a little funny for a middling student of meditation to attempt to describe the ultimate culmination and fulfillment of the practice. But this is what Integral is all about. It is to shed some basic light, and lend some basic categories, to this whole thing that is the ultimate freedom, the ultimate bliss and surrender, the ultimate meaning of life, the universe, and everything. I will attempt to spoil the ending for both of us, with the understanding that I'm not entirely sure that I stayed awake through the second half of the picture. The Causal State reveals the ultimate essence of the self and reality, a sort of singularity. The Nondual State is then integrating Causal into Waking, bringing that State into the world, as the world, as the most active agent and the most passive, emotionally-invested observer. This is a fully awake and enlightened person, if they stay that way, all the time. Constant consciousness through waking, dreaming, and deep sleep, and the ability to silence the entire brain at will. Exceedingly rare, also everpresent and always already realized. 🫥 