## A Map of Reality

The colorful diagram above is many things. For one, it is a literal map of reality according to human thought. How does it compare to other maps of reality? Most of us probably never considered the need for one. For many of us, the conclusions of this map will be quite surprising, perhaps challenging, and certainly there is a learning curve. Integral Theory presents us with a simple diagram of ourselves and the world we comprehend. It brings incredible clarity to an everyday consciousness which evolves through the expression of individuals and society. It is a map of past, present, and future, showing not only paths to better outcomes, but also revealing mysteries within the deepest reaches of the psyche. It distills even the most ineffible teachings of a radically expanded consciousness into simple language that can help to legitimize the most advanced forms of comprehension and expression, as well as the reality of enlightened states of consciousness and the continuing need for authentic and updated cultures of spiritual practice.

### A Theory of Theories

This is not a secret teaching, but a straightforward condensation of popular and well-known ideas. Its particularly groundbreaking and visionary aspect is in philosophically demonstrating how the five Elements and their inter-related parts capture and categorize everything that could be considered real. Integral is unique in that it is a meta-theory, or a theory of all possible theories, thus it is in another category from philosophy, psychology, spirituality, metaphysics, and certainly science, but nevertheless, it equally applies to all of them, and can be used in any field of endeavor. You may see Integral presentations aimed at leadership training, spirituality, self help, academia, or even media criticism. Here, we are simply trying to teach the model itself, as an open-ended tool to be used for any purpose.

### The Genre of Ken Wilber

Like the profound works of Jung, Huxley, Einstein, Neitzche, and Marx, Ken Wilber's philosophy should best be considered exploratory, open-ended, and interpretive. As in those cases, it serves more to reconstruct a conceptual foundation where none truly existed before, rather than attempting to refine, finish, or prove particular points. It is not pop psychology, nor is it new age spiritualism or occultism. It's not pseudo-science, or science at all. It's not religion - though again, it can potentially be used as any of these, as it is a complete meta-theory of reality and consciousness. This makes Integral Theory particularly difficult to place, as a subject, as a topic, or in a bookstore.

### Wilber's Integral Community

Ken Wilber is an extremely advanced student of meditation, has a savante-like reading ability, and also a friendly and captivating personality. Among his readers, who become fascinated with his books and ideas, a certain cult of personality and niche celebrity status has developed around Wilber, particularly in the 2000s. Still, his primary contribution is his career of writing sophisticated and accessible books covering the vast reaches of this mind-expanding approach to consciousness. In advanced age, Wilber continues to write and to appear in various podcasts and talks, developing new ways of expressing these ideas. His various institutes and academic programs offer superior resources. Stein unLimited has found this theory so useful, helpful, profound, and unnoticed, that a large part of our mission is teaching these ideas in our own way, because we felt like it would be cool of us. 🛹

### Theory Origin

This is not the place for a biography of Ken Wilber, but he developed Integral Theory through a process of earnestly attempting to understand the nature of reality and consciousness, studying the world religions and the great thinkers. In his early twenties, Wilber published his first major work. Throughout currently 25 subsequent books from the early 1980s to present day, Wilber recognizes five major complementary revision phases that redefined the nature of Integral Theory. For simplicity, we can say that these phases roughly correspond to the introduction of each of the five Elements. His early work was in modernizing notions of States and Shadow, and also eluded to other Elements. He soon become fascinated with the idea that States are the culmination of Levels, or stages of consciousness. Levels were refined with the Lines concept, and Wilber's writing came to resemble developmental psychology more than new age philosophy. In the fourth phase, Quadrants were introduced, and Integral Theory considered itself a meta-philosophy, as it had expanded it's scope and embrace. The fifth and current revision introduced Types, as well as Integral post-metaphysics, defining the nature of reality as perspective-based.

### Levels of Reality

There are three key insights at the root of Integral Theory. **First**, consciousness is fundamental to reality. While there must be an objective reality, the entire reality that can be known is that which can be comprehended. Levels and States are thus considered the lenses through which reality is perceived, and so it becomes necessary to define the major categories of Levels and States. **Second**, both States and Levels develop greater comprehension of reality through a predictable and commonplace (ubiquitous) progression of recognizable stages. Altitudes are the Levels of the human mind, in self and culture and in all particular developmental vectors. The Altitudes model ultimately resulted from Ken Wilber studying every developmental model in existence, and finding an astounding level of overlap, suggesting that collective mental reality itself is an overlapping and inter-relating evolutionary stage progression. **Third**, since these are universal Levels of mind, they show up in all four Quadrants, which means that the same Levels apply in ways that may seem at first unconnected, until you realize that individual and collective ideas inform one another, and mental ideas create physical and procedural realities. Thus, the same Altitudes appear as memes in technology, law, business, art, criticism, personal life, social life, career, politics, economics, and of course, comprehension of reality. The same general character of Altitudes occur equally in the history of civilization, in the stories of our own lives, and in how we understand them. They are like ingrained mental software, taught by socialization, which determine what we primarily comprehend, value, and resist.

### Integral Thinking

Integral is not just these concepts or this model. It is properly the process of arriving at them. It is a style of thinking, or more properly, an advanced Level of comprehension. Indeed, it is the most recent to emerge, and highest Altitude commonly found. The Integral style of thought is a recognized developmental stage of the mind, which is to say, intuitively seeing core stages of consciousness in thought is itself associated with a universal stage of consciousness, which is called the Integral stage, or Teal Altitude. The Integral Theory and model are attempts to explicitly define and express the Integral stage of consciousness. Altitudes are a native Teal comprehension.

### Second Tier Levels

"Integral" refers to Ken Wilber's theory, writing, and community, but within the theory, Integral refers to the Teal developmental stage, or any expression of that Level, which may disagree with or be unaware of Ken Wilber, and may use completely different language. Altitudes is a model of Teal reality, while the five Elements (including Altitudes) is a better model of the reality of the next stage, Turquoise Meme. Both, or together, can be considered Integral. A [language](https://www.stuartdavis.com/blog/creating-language) can be Integral. Even a [clock](https://steinunlimited.com/time) can be Integral. The immanent global emergence of Teal is a momentous occasion, in that Teal is the first truly Level-aware Level. Teal functionally indicates a self-awareness of Levels - a move so meta that it creates a Second Tier of stages, whereas the First Tier, which include six stages (and the present world), are unaware of Levels of consciousness. This allows Integral to knowingly operate upon the First Tier, which, again, is everything and everyone. The evolution of mind is becoming systemically self-aware, and now has the capacity to refer to itself as Integral, and to easily draw up a diagram of all of the Levels leading up to it. Even easier to just use Wilber's diagram. This creates a crisis of self-reference. In the case of Wilber, the Integral stage is deliberately explaining what the Integral stage is, claiming to be it, claiming to represent reality from its perspective, and branding itself and its community with the same word, Integral. It is quite possible that the Second Tier Levels will unfold collectively without any awareness of Ken Wilber and without ever calling it Integral. That would be wasteful. A useful analogy is to say that scientists refer to themselves as scientists and write scientific papers for the scientific community. Integral writers refer to themselves as Integral and write Integral papers for the Integral community, by any name. Here we are.

### Universal Donor

Integral Theory is a system of generalizations that can be used as basic orientation points across professional fields, cultures, and contexts to ensure an Integral Level standard of perspective inclusion. In a survey of psychological concepts and models of consciousness, Wilber discovered that Integral was a commonly used term to describe this emerging Level of consciousness, meaning system holistic and heirarchically inclusive. In a parallel of central significance and influence to the Wilberian perspective, the theoretical advances of eastern mystic Sri Aurobindo were also self-termed Integral Yoga.

### What Does Integral Actually Mean?

Commonly, integral would indicate something is an important part or necessary aspect of a whole. Integral Theory asks, what are the important parts or necessary aspects of reality? What are the important parts or necessary aspects of answering that question, about anything? Relationships between parts and wholes characterize the entire conceptual mechanic and operational fulcrum of the theory (as explored in the Quadrants section on Holons). In mathematics, the integral is a sort of function which generalizes other functions under consideration, enabling another level of insights and enhanced calculation potential. As with Integral Theory, generalizing here does not so much suggest omitting detail or diversity, but more suggests including the abstraction of commonality and trends from a transcending meta perspective. This sort of inductive path yields archetypal patterns, dynamics, and mechanics which comprise an astoundingly elegant and comprehensive model of reality.

### Growth Hierarchy

Resist the urge to consider a stage model cruel. Altitudes are stages of care, inclusion, and leadership as well. Higher, deeper, more evolved, developed, or inclusive, do not necessarily mean personally or morally superior, wise, mature, or smart. There's nothing smarter, more lovable or blameless, than a Level 1 Infrared newborn baby. The purpose of the baby isn't to grow up, grow old, and die. The baby is an end in itself. It could not possibly comprehend this moral argument, or any argument. What I have in common with the baby is instinct. Who besides the higher Level will change the baby's diapers? It becomes your responsibility, quite naturally, to try and develop the baby up a few Levels, to potty train it, so you no longer have to take care of the things the baby is unaware of that are problematic for both of you. As the baby moves up through Levels, becoming Magenta at 2 years old, Red at 3, Amber at 8, Orange around 14, the nature of your relationship will change, as you go from taking care of it, to giving it help and advice, to coexisting as equals, in healthy cases. It can be deceptive to think of higher Levels as strictly positive, as the lower Levels are fundamental and foundational. If moving up Levels means any one thing, it means greater awareness and responsibility. The challenge is not to get to the highest Level, or even the next Level. The challenge arises from the intuitive nature of this developmental heirarchy and recognizing where your primary expressions exist within it.

### We're Expecting More of Us 😺

Wilber provides a philosophical groundwork, a manifesto, or just introduction to the Integral Level, but it arises in nature, and Teal should be expected to grow in population frequency, social visibility, and influence, with or without any particular assistance. For our purposes, it is most essential to simply examine the plausibility of these ideas, and observe in passing that Wilber offers an astounding language and clarity of perspective, but the integral Level which exists in reality is mostly unaware of his work. We wanted to try using this framework self-consciously and conspicuously, see how fluent we can become with it, what it may reveal to us, and what effects it might have on our lives.

### Hey, This Is Like Some Other Thing...

It is. The Five Elements are matter-of-fact observations and concepts we use intuitively but often unconsciously in today's world. Insights pertaining to spirituality apply equally to all religious, spiritual, and atheist or agnostic perspectives. Wilber's work is a grand synthesis; practically no aspect of it is entirely original, and nearly everything represented in this model derives from the overlap of numerous common sources. What is unique and creative to Wilber's work is his selection, curation, and framing of these academic, literary, and esoteric sources, the way he organizes and categorizes them, and the pioneering scope of his entire articulated vision.

### Physics and a Theory of Everything

There is a common conception that fundamental particles, waves, or field dynamics in physics, as the building blocks, or structural essence, of reality, perhaps even the thoughts of God, should reveal everything we need to know about the nature of reality. "Theory of Everything" canonically refers to a theory uniting the physics of relativity and quantum theory. This is a conservative appraisal of "everything," leaning heavily towards extremely large and small things. Since Integral Theory includes material reality, and also consciousness and culture (which are real but do not have mass, charge, volume, or spin), Integral is a better contender for Theory of Everything, if anyone still wants to fight about it. 🥊

### Integral Particle Physics

Reality is not merely a massive heap of protons, neutrinos, leptons, etc., but those particles stack and organize at various Levels: neutrons, atoms, molecules, cells, tissues, and each Level has unique dynamics and mechanics, all flexing and flowing operationally with one another, moving together. The nature of particles is of great interest to technology and philosophy. At every scale of size, the "building blocks" of that Level have their own novel, emergent structure and dynamics. The cells of my body each do their own thing, they all have their function, but also they "integrate" into my body. We discovered cells, and this opened up a new world of comprehending biology and medicine. We discovered genetics. The derivative of cells, step down a Level, and you find that cells are integral molecules. The periodic table yields the substance of reality. Of course, molecules are integral atoms, are integral subatomic particles, are integral quarks. We'll find reality. 👍🏿 Just keep digging.

### A Thing Made Out Of Things That Makes A Thing

It's okay to talk about physics. Material and mental reality are both composed of Levels of holons, or whole entities unto themselves which exist as part of another entity, as far up and as far down as we have ever been able to see. These are holons, because whole atoms are parts of whole molecules, which are parts of whole cells. And I see you looking up towards the top of the stack of atoms and molecules and thinking, **what's the top Level?**

### The Most Interesting Thing Anywhere

Is it the Universe? The Meta-Versity? An embryo floating in space? Closer. You see, the Universe is very very big, and so I see how, after looking at very very small, you might think the other extreme. What is the Universe? It's not a bunch of this, far as we know. There's not a bunch of people in it. Nah, it's pretty much just tons and tons of lower Levels: particles, waves, molecules. These low Levels take up all of the physical space in the Universe. Low Levels exist everywhere, with extreme amounts of space between them, and they collectively form galaxies, stars, and planets. The microscopic composes the macroscopic - not intelligent or self-aware or alive - just big, and relatively empty and unremarkable. It's incomprehensibly vast, very impressive, and as far as we know, there is nothing out there, in any of that, doing what's going on right here, where we marvel at its vastness and comprehend its meaning. It's you, my love. You are a higher Level than the galaxy. Molecules and stars aren't alive. And what's more, the highest Level in existence is probably within your reach.

### Middle Way ftw

Big and small are elusive frontiers, but insight has no size or physical properties. We could say reality is precisely "this" big, or infinite, or as big as you care to know. Middle-sized, or sizeless, is where we discover Levels. The cosmos appears to us conceptualized by a Level of comprehension. In any topic, from quantum theory to transcendental States of consciousness, Levels are the most essential indicator of progress. All concepts will be rendered through the respective lenses of instinctual, magic, mythic, rational, sensitive, integral, and so on. Atoms and molecules and light are being you and this environment, but your awareness of that is conceptual, because you don't experience fundamental particles, you experience educated rational awareness, which we call Orange Meme (Level 5, rational achiever.) This is where you start thinking of matter and substance in terms of atoms and molecules, and you tend to reduce consciousness and internals to their co-arising physical and material expressions. Only Orange experiences the self as conditioned brain chemistry. Your ideas of self and cosmos arose from a combination of instinct and social training, both of which are developmental holons. Teal Meme (Level 7, integral developer) experiences self and cosmos as holons. Your self holon, or your felt sense of what you are, is a learned concept (meme) that your brain, consciousness, society, and culture generate together (the four Quadrants.) Our current developmental process is only semi-automatic, and it is imperfect, but we train youth to become adults by imparting a natural sequence of self-concept Levels, usually up to somewhere from Amber to Green (Levels 4 and 6).

### The Evolving Stack

Inevitably, our self concept arose through socialization stacked on top of instinct. What we call instinct, in terms of behavior, is also a lower Level of consciousness that we share with the animals: bodily sensory awareness. If Altitudes are the "visible light colors" of Mind, beneath the rainbow we descend into these various Levels of instinctual Life that developed biologically. At the super- or meta-Level of Life, genes are the evolutionary driver, generating Levels over the course of million-year epochs of increasing consciousness from virus to orchid to bread mold to tapeworm to trout to iguana to rat to lemur, by integrating emergent holon structures (organ systems, essentially) with the former structures, simply because higher Levels, though more fragile, offer enormous advantages under ideal conditions. Consciousness increases. Arriving at homo sapiens, we cross the meta-Level threshold from Life to Mind, so that the relevant evolutionary driver switches from biological genes to socialized memes.

### Ontogeny Recapitulates Phylogeny

When taken over the total span of evolution in an arguably abstract sense, our own emergent holon structures (internal organs) map out the primary divisions of biological taxonomy. In our own miracle of birth, we traverse all of the stages leading up to human at hyperspeed, starting from chemical proteins receiving the spark of life as single cell sperm and egg. We can see the progression of biological Levels as the embryo transforms into any old baby, going through multicellular, animal, vertebrate, mammal, primate, and human structural emergence. The same basic sequence is echoed, or recapitulated, within the womb during pregnancy, and the embryonic infant oddly mirrors the embryo of each creature leading up to homo sapiens historically, including being submerged in fluid since our distant ancestors evolved in the ocean. Evolutionary structures are largely built atop of (holons transcend and include.) Genetic holons, over the history of our species from the primordial ooze, "evolved" (in the sense of increasing Level, not coincidental adaptation) the advanced organs that enable symbolic social communication. This enables our self and civilization holons, with a new progression of evolutionary Levels (Altitudes.)

### A Masterpiece of DNA

Over Earth's history, life underwent an overall holonic transformation, or meta-evolution. We could call it the phylogeny of consciousness. Tracing history over vast stretches of geological time, it is clear that emergent biological structures come to dominate the food chain, then to become the basis of future emergence, often in association with cataclismic global changes. Higher Levels emerge overpowered and transformative to the ecosystem, but increasingly brief and unstable, relative to lower forms. With homo sapiens, the story of Life has reached a sort of conclusion, as humans are aware of genetics and have the power to manipulate them. We are meta-Life. Our evolutionary driver is now memes (behavioral and social evolutionary units.) The developmental mechanism (holons) remains unchanged as conceptual Levels of self and Mind unfold in the accelerated time scale of lifetimes and generations, by integrating primitive structural concepts into more complicated and inclusive systems. The holonic currency, or the evolutionary driver of consciousness, is now social, mental, and conceptual memes, continuing to express our domesticated but fundamentally unchanged instincts.

### Any Old Baby

The first Level, Infrared default instinct, appears in a baby born today as the same structure of consciousness experienced by a Cro-Magnon cave person. The baby must learn through communication not the entirety, but the basics, of everything that has occured in the history of civilization and thought, or the Levels of Mind. This weakness is also the homo sapiens superpower, as any old baby can pick up where every old dead person left off. Prior to complex language, very little information transcended death and physical proximity. By working as a social collective of Life forms, the Levels of Mind can accomplish meaningful Altitude development in a single lifetime, where biological evolution required an unfathomable number. Each ensuing Level radically accelerates development by increasing technological and social access to information. To get up to the Levels available in your social system is simply a matter of going with the flow, but to go beyond those, one must take matters into their own hands.

### The Spectrum Of Consciousness

Integral pursues integrating perspectives on the visible and known, rather than extremes and the unknown. It is all about recognizing where perspectives show up relative to other perspectives, and trying to find the one which includes as many others as possible. For all the things that we may think we "see,"" we are only actually seeing light. By metaphor, if light represents all of truth, all that can be seen, then every perspective is like a color, all equally true, but all equally partial, because if you could only see one color, you would miss out on everything else. The colors are not equal. Red has lower frequency, higher wavelength than Violet. It is more fundamental, more stable, and more common, but less complicated and deep. Violet also includes Red in our analogy, so each Level sees more and more colors. Teal's map of reality is a rainbow because it sees consciousness as a wavelike developmental spectrum. The electromagnetic spectrum serves as an uncannily apt metaphor for Levels, with Matter and Substance in the Radio range, Life in the Microwave and Infrared, Mind (Altitudes) in the Visible Light rainbow, and leaving plenty of room for evolution in the diverse bands of cosmic rays. If energy is mass times the speed of light squared, then light is the energetic currency of matter, and the Big Bang is indeed, "Let there be light". From there, the accelerating developmental unfolding of the entire spectrum of Levels towards greater consciousness, all of reality forever, is one single evolutionary process.

### Organizing Light Into Colors

With holons and Altitudes, we arrive at our Integral perspective, our Theory of Everything which transcends and includes the extant truth claims of our time, and resolves the paradoxes and dissonance of prior Levels by including all of the light as various wavelengths, or colors. Through our Teal Meme lens, we view all of reality as a continuous spectrum of Levels, from the Big Bang of substances burning through space in the Universe, to the emergence of Life on Earth, to the rise of civilization, to the present day and perhaps the Future. The First Tier places us in the visible light of self-awareness, and the Second Tier is self-aware that light comes in many colors, or frequencies. Some of them are lower than Second Tier, and some of them are higher, suggesting a potential Third Tier, based on the fundamental structures of consciousness perfected through mastering spiritual States. Hopefully, we see that we have the potential to be the highest stack of holons that exists in the known cosmos.

### The Holonic Perspective

It may seem strange to call people color names, or to think of yourself and reality as an evolving stack of Levels. How else do we answer this fundamental question of philosophy: what am I? I am, at various Levels, light, water, carbon, protein, awareness, a collection of organs, self-awareness, a human, Adam, an Integral Theory enthusiast, an evolving stack of holonic Levels, and pure consciousness without form. All of these answers are correct, describing me at and from my various Levels, but notice that since I could answer the question at any Level, then any Level of answer would be incomplete. The Integral Level of answer is that I am an evolving stack of Levels, or from Turquoise, that I exist as a relationship between the AQALALATAS Elements. These may sound strange to personally identify as, but nevertheless, they are higher Level answers, more complete, since they indicate that I am various inter-related Levels.

### The Nature of Reality

As a through-line, consider asking all the people you walk past, your family and coworkers, all the people around the world you don't know, all the great thinkers and famous minds all throughout history: **"What is reality?"** How could you organize all of that into a simple presentation? Imagine that your goal is to take all of that information, and explain it all as simply as possible, so that if you were to then go back to each and every one of those people and present this information, there would be a maximum of understanding and a minimum of disagreement. How could you explain it all, the nature of reality as we know it, to a teenager, to a grandma, to a student, to an alien, to someone like me? This is the goal of Integral Theory; to create bridges that update consciousness. Far from being a mental prison, the Integral framework offers us the blueprints to the mental prison we're already in, and encourages us not to think of it like that. This not a belief system, but a global put-in point, a most-zoomed-out view possible. It references what you already know, as well as what else there is, with an optimized set of containers and dividers. These are not constraints, but liberating place-holders, creating a bias towards bias-checking, and revealing opportunities through apparent growth vectors.

### Perreneal Wisdom

Each Element explores a core pattern of nature and mind, and this may be considered "spiritual," as it pertains to topics that we term that way. We gladly embrace and re-own this term, but note that this comes from a place of utmost empirical skepticism towards belief systems. Integral spirituality is not magic and myth, and requires no membership or faith. For those who are religious, we hope that Integral will help to lend context and conceptual support to your experiences and beliefs. We as a brand consciously own and embrace our own versions of magic and myth, and find them to be healthy and valuable within their domain. These are considered pre-rational expressions, while Integral spirituality is trans-rational, or operating upon the rational process itself. The majority of what is considered spiritual in this context pertains to State structures, or lasting changes to brain functioning and felt sense of reality and identity, sometimes by freak accident, but usually as the result of meditative practices. These practices are commonly associated with and best upheld by religious traditions.

### Integral Medicine

Integral, as positive psychology, tends to focus more on defining health rather than illness, but for clinical purposes, all five Elements contribute substantially to modeling mental illness patterns. Integral Health is expressed as openness, acceptance, and non-attachment to particular Levels, Quadrants, Lines, etc. Illness arises as Shadow, or unconscious resistance and negative emotional intensity, often expressed in terms of Allergy and Fixation. Fixation or addiction would suggest an unhealthy allocation of consciousness to a particular Level, Quadrant, or Line, for example, to the exclusion of others, creating a blind spot, or Shadow. With Levels, any particular Level can become an exclusive point of focus and shut out or alienate the Levels above and below. This produces pathological behavior. Allergy would be the opposite, a rejection or unconsciousness towards particular Integral features. Altitudes all express some degree of Fixation in their current Level, and some degree of Allergy to all other Levels, particularly the previous. Gods of the old religion become the devils of the new. The First Tier is fundamentally unhealthy in today's world by today's standards, because they are pretending real hard that Levels don't exist, which renders human motives and values into an incomprehensible black mystery box. There are seven common Levels out there in the world today, and no matter which one you are, *most people are not at your Level.* You are wrong to most people. Frustrating. Eternal frustration is unhealthy, in Integral.

### Cleaning Up

Shadow shows up in Integral as Allergies, Fixations, various fallacies, and any form of unconsciously deliberate unconsciousness. Integral also recognizes diagnostic clinical Types and therapies, and recommends different categories of therapy to treat different Levels of pathology. The role of therapies in any case is to Clean Up Shadow, which means integrating it with consciousness. Importantly, Shadow work is somewhat disconnected from Growing Up (Levels) and Waking Up (States). Despite claims of coaches and gurus, these three fundamental pursuits appear far more independent than most people have ever assumed. You can still be quite neurotic, pathological, or unhealthy while expressing high States or Levels of transcendent consciousness. The Shadow in these cases is transcended, but not integrated, and continues to operate from the unconsciousness of lower Levels. One of the great tragic blunders is to assume that profound spiritual or intellectual talent somehow produces moral perfection or even common decency. 