### Any Old Horse 🐎

The nondual view is that reality is One. The mind can divide it up in any way that serves a purpose. As mental beings, we have a native talent for conceptual typing. The very mechanism of thought and language is pattern recognition, or discerning one type of thing from another. We do this by subconsciously comparing "things" against primitive intuitive archetypes that are instilled in us through experience. **What color is the horse you're thinking of?** Well, it could be brown, or white, or golden.... It could be any color. 🤷🏿‍♀️ Our archetype does not have to be rational to be useful. Even without a biology degree, I see a horse with leopard fur on it and I immediately know something's up. This is no proper horse. It is whatever it is, of course, but you have defied my archetype, sir. My "horse" can be a wide a range of color patterns, but not leopard. When we imagine our leopard-horse, or a pegacorn, we exercize our magic-mythic mind, blending archetypes together. The horse archetype, or ideal, is an average of all familiar experiences concerning "horses." It isn't a particular color, but a fuzzy range of acceptable features (four legs, rough hair, large muzzle, mane, no wings, no forehead horn) being constructed continuously from inestimable type discriminations.

### Primordial Splitting

As you can tell from all the diversity in existence, anything that has features has types. The mind is a sea of types. Integral seeks universal Types, or the most fundamental distinctions of consciousness. It has already found primordial "types" of consciousness with Levels, Lines, Quadrants, and States. We include the Integral specification that Types should be Horizontal or at least Level-aware, in order to get that capital T. We must ask, how could we conceptualize a universal Type? What are the Types of the cosmos, of consciousness, of reality? You may be familiar with sacred geometry, numerology, astrology, and various forms of esoteric alchemy, all revealing sacred Typologies of the kosmos. Their models might be dualist, trinitarian, four is popular (think mandalas), five through nine can make stars, or it might be more complicated or less geometricly balanced. Integral uses four equivalent Quadrant perspectives in this way (as a Type system.)

### Quadrant Preference

Recall that Quadrants model the interfacing of reality and consciousness. We intrinsically use them as we discriminate between interior and exterior, individual and collective, and we could not use language without doing that. The universality of Quadrants will be further confirmed as we demonstrate the overlap between Quadrant preference and many other Type systems. The Tao symbol, the Quadrants map, medieval elements, and Carl Jung's theory of cognitive functions, coming from different cultures and serving different purposes, all essentially point to the same core vision: the duality of one and many, subject and object, layer together into the quaternity that we experience as reality. Our attitudes towards one and many, subject and object, are a large part of human personality that divide us pretty evenly. Quadrant preference reflects our Types of orientation to reality itself.


### iso Integral Types

Levels are perhaps more descriptive of people overall than any Type system. With Vertical Levels, baseline consciousness moves through a generalized directional sequence over time, slowly and unevenly but without skipping. Horizontal means that Type should not indicate a developmental sequence or pattern. Level growth changes the personality, making it appear that people grow through Levels by traversing Types, as would inevitably occur when studies of Types don't control for Levels. The individual might develop by balancing and integrating contrary Types, or it may be the case that some of your "types" are equivalent to Levels. It's still safe to use them, but they should not be considered Integral. Look at it this way: imagine a baby, a young woman, a poor woman, a rich woman, an enlightened sage. She has gone through all the Levels, and she was entirely herself the whole time. So what exactly was it that remained common about her, all the way throughout this journey of becoming all sorts of people with different habits and tendencies and awareness and concerns? *That* would be an Integral Type. For example, she had a feminine Type of perspective throughout her journey. That is useful to Integral. As a model of personality, it is dreadful. And overplayed. Can we do better?


### Flavors of Development

What Types are revelant to the evolution of consciousness? As with Lines, we do not have a built-in selected Types system. We are free to use popular or custom inserts, such as Tarot symbols. The popular Tarot deck includes major arcana cards depicting a cosmic cycle of mythological archetyes. The minor arcana include an elemental suit Typology, as well as developmental progressions in the card ranks. These mystical presentations often deliver a sort of miniature toy version of Integral Theory but tend to be pre-Integral, as in the case of classical Tarot. Developmental sequences are commonplace, but rarely universal and true. The solution is Integral. The Five Elements work far better in combination together. None of them alone sufficiently describe consciousness or reality to Turquoise standards. Integral is able to discern genuine Types from "types" that are mostly equivalent to combinations of Quadrants, Levels, Lines, or States. This Integral ethos would apply to model conception and design (or selection), as well as research methodology (a perennial issue in this field.)

### Hey, What's Your Type? ♑

Integral endorses Type-awareness and familiarity. Typologies are not mutually exclusive, and without a primary system to recommend wholly on Integral merits, we commonly use several at once. We call it profiling. 🤣. Ironically, gender defaults as one of the more useful and robust typologies, as it is somewhat predictive, and mostly permanent. ♀️♂️ Types are the dominant modality of assessing consciousness today. We think and speak in terms of Types, rather than developmental heirarchy. We will explore a variety of decent Type systems to help get the hang of it.

### Methodological Pluralism

Integral Theory's inclusion of Types as one of the Five Elements is a double-edged sword. Using Green pluralistic Typologies, we need to take the precaution that they operate without regard for the other Elements. Pre-Integral Types are better than no Types, but just as we include Types, we challenge existing personality assessment to take into account Level and Line development, State practice, and Quadrant perspectives. Thus far, the fundamental laws of Green Typology seem to be that Types must be equally valuable, examined in isolation, and caused by nothing. This results in pluralistic Types. For example, consider the common Big 5 personality trait of neuroticism. Neuroticism is a good inclusion to the Big 5 model, because it doesn't have high correlation with the other four instruments. But does it correlate with other Integral Elements? If we include Big 5 as Types in our Integral model, now we have to ask, how much of the tendency towards neurotic States is a proper personality trait, and how much of it is caused by developmental factors? Controlling for those, we may be able to refine our definition to only include personality-specific neuroticism. The pluralistic methodology of Big 5 neuroticism does a great job of finding a primary personality trait, but not a universal or Integral Type. We can begin to test Type systems against, for example, Levels. This is easy to do, once researchers have an Integral model. The model helps us to define and contextualize neuroticism, as well as the Big 5 model itself. We could compare neuroticism and clinical diagnostic types data against Levels data. This is necessary if we are to ever arrive at an Integral understanding of mental health.

### Green World 🟩

Academic and philosophical communities are very opposed to notions of growth heirarchy, as well as "labeling" people or their behavior. Green dismisses Integral as reductionistic, offensive, stereotyping, and oppressive. If you have to be able to tell the difference between people, as in every pursuit, and if you want to understand why you are the way you are, what sort of lifestyle and occupation are appropriate for you, you're left with "horizontal" (flatland) Types. Ordinary people turn to extraordinarily pseudo-scientific, conceptually and methodologically bankrupt systems, such as astrology, a fascinating typology sporting zero predictive power or pragmatic use for stated purposes.

### Illness Types

Clinical psychology (as opposed to positive) identifies people by assessing their symptoms and comparing them against diagnostic criteria. This is an extremely advanced and highly scientific Type system, intended to treat people with mental health problems. The methodology is not coming from a sophisticated understanding of consciousness, the mind, the brain, and behavior. It is coming from a practical scientific approach of assembling complaints (symptoms) into categories (illnesses), and then testing treatments to see if there is a statistical reduction of complaints. If there is a statistical reduction of complaints, and side effects are decidedly worth it, it then becomes medicine for consciousness, the mind, the brain, and behavior, regardless of what's actually happening. If you complain, and want help, you describe symptoms and will be diagnosed according to clinical Typing. It's as likely to get you to stop complaining about symptoms as it claims to be. People start diagnosing themselves with various personality disorders because the DSM criteria is the only Type system that is taken seriously. It is highly influenced by public opinions and attitudes, by politics, big pharma, and by chemical dependency. We would again love to see clinical medicine embrace the Integral perspective, and we would love to have more Integral definitions of clinical pathology. 
