### Origin of Altitudes

The First and Second Tiers, Levels 1 through 8, result from an extensive survey of developmental Line models in mainstream psychology. The Spiral Dynamics Values Line model was a progenitor of Altitudes, coming from the mostly business-related efforts of researchers Don Beck and Christopher Cowan, adapted from the academic research of Clare Graves. Altitudes does not define a particular Line, it instead attempts to generalize the core pattern which appears regardless of the Line or Quadrant under consideration. The Third Tier Levels, similarly, result from a survey of rare cases of outstanding development, transpersonal sources. We find a base conceptual overlap between advanced consciousness methodologies and wisdom insights all around the world and throughout history, proliferating a fundamental zenith of individual and collective human development in spiritual enlightenment, and a progression of transcendent States which can become Levels as the Third Tier materializes.

### Define Healthy, Mature, and Adult

A funny thing happens when you study human development. You try and define maturity in terms of anything besides physical biology, and no matter what you say, you find empirically that most "adults" are technically still at the measured stages considered appropriate for children. If you set the bar too low, you inevitably neglect the massive changes that can occur in healthy adult development. Investigating personality, abilities, or intellect, we find that age is positively correlated with development, but the vast majority of "adults" are in many ways comparable to older children in terms of their maturity. They may have a horizontally wider grasp of the objects in the world appearing to them at that Level, but they continue at that Altitude, using the lens that the child will hopefully outgrow. Rarely, we may find a 21-year old three stages higher than their parents. People are always learning, but that learning (development) can be horizontal or vertical: experiencing more through the same lens, or updating lenses.

### The Reality of the Situation

In America right now, Red Meme is considered childish and immature, while everyone Amber and above is granted the dignity of being an adult (Orange then attacks Amber belief as "childish" while still considering them mature adults.) There is no formal recognition of a change in maturity from Amber to Orange to Green, but these perspectives commonly consider themselves to be matters of choice, preference, or upbringing. In other words, they conceptualize Levels as a horizontal Type system, ignoring the fact of directionality over time and that skipping Levels isn't mechanically possible. Green Meme is often considered youthful, naive, or immature, even though it is the highest Level commonly recognized by developmental theorists, and always appears after Amber and Orange developmentally. Amber and Orange call everything childish or wrong that does not agree with them. This is the monumental advance of Green Meme pluralism: it stops dismissing everything it disagrees with as childish and stupid, which is less childish and stupid, thus more developmentally mature. It does not understand and is resistant to Teal developmental growth hierarchy, so it will forever be the less childish innundated by the more childish, because all perspectives have equal essential merit, except for this one, which is better. We need Teal to transcend this, and extend that radically equal dignity and merit to a consciousness which develops through Levels of increasing capacity to perceive dignity and merit.

### Terminology

Altitudes might be called different names in a given context to reflect various aspects. **Levels** is popular, my preference, but **stages** can be a better descriptor, and feels more natural to say. In the current system, the term **Altitudes** emphasizes verticality and progression. In SD, they are called value **memes** (vMemes), refering to the Richard Dawkins memetic notion, and because SD studies the Values developmental Line. Dwakins proposed that conceptual ideas (memes) exhibit evolutionary mechanics similar to the way DNA replicates in biological evolution. A larger family of meta-memes, or meme-plexes, can conglomerate many compatible themes, values, and notions. We are suggesting that the most meta of meme-plexes would be an Altitude, containing the entire generative operating system of a people in a holographic form. Calling Levels **waves** emphasizes their oscillating, fluid dynamic, rising and falling like mysterious tides across the gradient spectrum of consciousness, as opposed to discrete stages that a person clicks into and never backslides, stagnates, or plateaus.

### Levels of Lines in All Quadrants

**UL:** Levels match and resemble classic Piaget stages of Cognitive Line development, or really, most stage systems. You should see the broad sketch of your own life in the chart, arriving somewhere around the top of the First Tier in general. For more spiritual thinkers, you may recognize the Third Tier from meditative, mystical, and contemplative traditions. You may see the overlap of Altitudes with the tree of life, Buddhism, or yogic chakras.

**UR:** These Levels express the overall technological paradigm of any tool, item, artifact, or system. An architect applies Altitudes to their ideas of how to design buildings. We find ourselves in an era of history clearly characterized by digital media, internet, mobile phones, smart devices, web, social media, and more recently AI personalities and encyclopedias. These devices are connected to, plugged into, an overall Green Meme tech base. In the Industrial, steam locomotive era, a cell phone would be largely useless without data or charge, as the parts to make the parts to make the parts could not be made without significant advances. Similarly, imagine time traveling somehow to the paleolithic, Infrared era. You know what a gun is, basically, and it would be nice to have one. How could you do it?

**LL:** Altitudes are moral value positions and political parties. Also, personal identity affiliations, relationship roles, and membership. All of the people you meet, your friends and enemies, family and strangers, all of their thoughts and feelings, their motives, their interests, their personality and drives, all of these Lines express Levels. Entertainment, media, literature, music, all arise from Altitudes, tracing the history of literature and artistic expression, providing an essential and universal contextual framework.

**LR:** Students of history, economics, or any social science will recognize these as stages of world civilization, going through the same progression of major paradigm shifts as the human individual, the same basic descriptors apply to the collective. These are the global paradigms of the human collective and all of its endeavors.

### The Ultimate Hack Job

It can be argued that Third Tier stages are unrelated, or loosely related, to the First and Second Tier Levels. Stacking perrenial spiritual wisdom of State exeriences atop the Levels discovered with entirely different methodologies may seem disingenuous or unfounded. On the other enormous hand, a developmentalist using only lower Levels will have no way to describe, conceptualize, or account for transpersonal States and the glaringly obvious fact that Waking Up is a developmental path with Levels to the progression that behave unmistakeably like the Levels of Growing Up, and result in sentiments, cognition, and capacities that seem clearly meta-transcendent and categorically improved in terms of the inclusion of perspectives.

### Growing Up and Waking Up

Integral may perhaps represent the first clear, comprehensible, formidable, and valid attempt to reconcile these two fundamental quests of the human spirit: Levels and States. Conventional developmentalists are unconcerned with spirituality and enlightenment, while spiritual masters may advance theories that include lower Levels but miss subtleties and nuances that are less the concern of their approach. Typically, these works lack the professional polish and clear presentation of conventional and commercial models, requiring a vast amount of study and cultural familiarity to translate the work into what it simply means.

### Welcome to Second Tier! 👋🏿

If you're still reading this, and it makes sense to you, that means that (at least) Teal is (at least) the Level of how you Think. You are stage 7, integral developer. It's not a contest, as you know. It means that there is no world for you. No culture. No tech base. It's just us. We're Second Tier poineers, because not comprehending reality is a clear and present threat to civilization. I hope that we can all work together in an Integral meshwork, flexing and flowing, because Altitudes reminds us how our Level addresses any issue: we develop it.

### The Integral Developer

Development starts with conceptualizing and discussing a meme. **Think** it. **Feel** comes much later for most people, where you start to genuinely ask yourself whether this theory actually describes this reality, and whether that motivates you to make decisions based on what this perspective illuminates for you (making it a useful tool by any stretch.) To behaviorally and socially act upon those decisions, to act it out, is to **Do** it. Every Level brings us into alignment with higher and deeper perspectives, and increased developmental awareness and positivity. The ultimate Turquoise goal is to upgrade to the latest stable human operating system: to **Wake Up** to all States, **Grow Up** to all Levels, **Open Up** to all Lines, **Show Up** in all Quadrants, and **Clean Up** through Shadow work.

### Altitudes Are Holons

The holonic nature of Memes (Altitudes) might not be clear at first. So let us examine how Memes are holons, whole-parts, or they transcend but include shallower Memes into themselves. The development of people, civilization, culture, and technology, all function in the same way that cells enfold molecules enfold atoms. The same way that paragraphs enfold sentences enfold words enfold letters, each at its own level and scale, with its own rules. A complex motor includes many simple wedges, levers, and inclined planes. A progressive contemporary painting includes techniques and themes developed in isolation over the course of art history. Level 1 Infrared is simply the default instinctual patterns which occur to our body in nature as roving packs of homo sapiens with fire and sticks, and the full Infrared range can be considered to stretch back into monkeys and shrews and lizards and fish. The language revolution, where visible color begins, is of key interest. In the UR, the unit or currency of evolution went from biological DNA to memetic self-concept. The new evolution is concepts, culture, technology, and legal systems.

### People From Animals

From DNA replication and natural selection of instinct, to ideological replication and social innovation of memes, there is a smooth transition in the Level stack that often goes unnoticed. Life changed the kosmic evolution vehicle from physical and chemical processes to the processes of biological selection. Each at its own Level and scale, with its own dynamics. If we take the electromagnetic spectrum metaphor to extremes, Levels extend down to the microwave range, the cellular, and the radio ranges of chemical molecular levels, the physical atomic, and so on. In the Future, they will likely extend upward into super-conscious inter-planetary AI motherbrains, or interdimensional kosmic alignment, or whatever is next up there in the cosmic rays. In the meantime, Altitudes become the Level system, or visible light, of self-aware human Mind, as long as that is what we are. Level 1 is nothing more than the default animal instinct we inherit at birth. In the transition to language and culture of Level 2 Magenta, the vehicle of kosmic evolution transforms from instinct to conceptual language. Just as atoms are enfolded in molecules are enfolded in cells, holonically, Magenta is a conscious cluster of instincts with a tendency to communicate, enfolded in a magical fantasy self concept resulting from communication. That was the moment when everything changed. You gave it a Name. Logos. Of course, in real life, nothing actually changed. This could all continue to be described in the UR as brainwaves and instinct, but we lack the sophistication, and ideas are easier to describe from the inside, with language.

### Instant Replay

Somehow, magically 🪄, instinct to communicate becomes an entirely new Meme of vocal sounds that stand for realities. Various instincts have predisposed us to have this capacity to convert ideas into words and then shape them with our mouths and speak them to one another and then hear and comprehend what was said. Great, it talks. Ask it what reality is. It will tell you magic lore. It repeats things it hears and makes symbolic associations without question. As societies grow and organize into Red, the lore becomes assembled by authorities into only the most superlative, ultimate, epic lore, and that is legend. I literally am legend at Red Meme. We are legend. The world is legend. Read what the ancient Greeks and Egyptians had to say about reality. They magnificently present tall tales of great feats and selfish exploits, the tragedy and folly of hubris in the face of symbolic supernatural power gods.

### Instinct -> Lore -> Legend -> Myth

Sooner or later, the legendary assembler of legend encounters the greatest story ever told, the perfect story that requires no embellishment. The God spell. In comes the axial period, the Amber wave, the religious order, the absolutist, the member, and what is the Bible, for example? It starts with a collection of the most important legends. Myth is a collection of ultimate legends, all serving the central purpose of fully explaining reality to everyone. The religious order educates some priviledged myth members to teach and spread religion effectively. The educated class becomes privy to truths and methods which shed doubt on the mythic tradition, which are perhaps more compelling than bureaucratic dogma. They don't start society over just yet. Everyone in the world doesn't suddenly realize we know nothing but wish-fulfilling myth, and reject all prior knowledge. They laboriously challenge and scrutinize their assumptions, picking them apart with reason, logic, and science.

### Rationality Orders Myth

When we became a Stage 5 democratic nation, we did not burn all mythic literature and forbid religious thinking, as that methodology would reflect Stage 4. We retained our traditions, integrating them as cultural (and multi-cultural) mythology instead of absolute truth. Transcend and include. Society and knowledge successfully existed before rationality. We are historically and statistically not rational by nature. Rational social order is a centuries-old (extremely recent) emergence. Science doesn't properly discover new truths, it checks whether truths are actually true. Rationality arises by testing and collecting myths which prove true, discarding those which prove irrational or non-productive.

### The Integral Revolution

Just as we beg our audience to not receive Integral as a religious myth, we also insist that the emergence of Second Tier should not expect to look anything like any prior Level. Bloody social revolt is more of a lower Level behavior. If you are Teal and want to know what the revolution looks like, just ask yourself what you would do, and if it isn't being done, do it. 👋🏿 Hi. **And Voila!** Reality is a stack of Levels in four Quadrants. You get it. You are now certifiable.