## [BASE SECTION]

### Four Ways to Look At Everything

Reality has interior and exterior, and it occurs in categories and instances. Always, in every case. This statement may seem so elementary as to be easy to overlook - so many of us do. The Quadrants model is so basic, in fact, that it just might be the most fundamental observation possible, which renders it both a functional definition of reality, and a map of consciousness. It is commonplace in contemporary thinking to reduce all of reality to just one or two Quadrants, resulting in fallacies and paradoxes, cognitive dissonance, conflict, and illness. Given our cultural bias, Quadrants may seem exotic or esoteric, but let us simply note how matter-of-fact it is. You're here, world is out there, you're one person in a social system. When we conjugate, "I", "We", "It", and "Its", our language structures our thinking into Quadrants.

### Reductionism Study

To get started, observe how each Quadrant correctly, but partially, answers our question, **"What is the nature of reality?"**

**Upper-Left | "I" | interior individual:** Awareness, memories, imagination, sensations, feelings, mood, thoughts.

- **UL Reality:** I am this mind, my thoughts and sensations, my story, all the things I know or believe. My reality includes this room, this world, other people, but they exist for me in my mind, as I imagine them, when I am aware of them. *My experience is reality.*

**Upper-Right | "It" | exterior individual:** Objects, currencies, my behavior, my brain and body, the apparent environment and sense information.

- **UR Reality:** A brain interprets sense information into a mental interface so it can comprehend circumstances well enough to advantageously transform outcomes, with the byproduct that it imagines itself into a supposedly cohesive story of experience as a social being. Through socialization, and through independent logical thought, the brainwave patterns consider themselves a person, in a situation, in a world, with incomplete knowledge. *This is the reality of the situation.*

**Lower-Left | "We" | interior collective:** Cultural values, relationships, norms, style, tone, expectations, consensus, communication, affiliation.

- **LL Reality:** We are social animals. Nobody starts life with any knowledge, or the assumption that critical thinking is worthwhile. The language and symbols of our culture are the medium of thought. We learn through communication. We are all domesticated, educated, enculturated, and brainwashed into the dominant pattern of the collective. Comprehension is ultimately constrained to what can be communicated and taught, and a certain degree of social reception and consensus is required for something to be considered true. *That's our reality.*

**Lower-Right | "Its" | exterior collective:** Technology, social infrastructure, big-picture concerns, media publications, systemic view, universals.

- **LR Reality:** The Universe produced human civilization through a tendency towards greater novelty and complexity called evolution. Civilization continues to evolve memetically, producing various forms of social organization, synthesizing idealogical positions and paradigms, attempting to improve the lives of individuals by organizing into more efficient and sustainable configurations. Everyone is more or less carried along or participating in the unfolding of this process, *which is the nature of reality.*

Hopefully, we see that each of these answers is true, which means that all of them are partial. A superior answer would include or at least acknowledge all four partially correct truths. In other words, we have an Integral answer: Quadrants are the nature of reality. We can apply this Integral approach to analysis of any kind, since everything occurs in four Quadrants.

### The Nature of Reality

We had suggested asking people, **"What is the nature of reality?"** We hope that you did, because it helps our credibility. What we find is that pretty much nobody indicates all four Quadrants in their answer, and the most common answers are different ways of articulating the notions above. Most likely, that bias for thinking of reality in terms of one Quadrant penetrates their entire conceptual apparatus. The point is not to judge, but to reveal a hidden bias, an incomplete, unconsciously partial and limiting view of reality, which trickles into everything we do. An Integral illness. Reductionism. All four Quadrants are true, so let's move forward into nonduality. There are no Quadrants. It's just one thing. I'm not joking. Why am I teaching Quadrants then, and why have I taken the time to establish them as fundamental components of reality? Because the Quadrants model the way that we already, pre-consciously experience and comprehend reality. Integral is not inventing Quadrants and trying to convince you they exist, but rather exposing that we already use them. We already cut nondual union consciousness reality itself into four fragments. It is the first thing we learn, and the final thing we unlearn. Reality does not conform to the conceits of the human mind, so we have Quadrants at Levels to model what's actually happening. It's an interface. Once you have this Integral perspective, you integrate the Quadrants, you use the map, it becomes clearer and clearer that they don't actually exist.😉 But that is a developmental process. It starts with viewing more scenarios and occasions from all four Quadrants, by isolating them, and seeing how they work together. Integral at least ensure you're covering the fundamental blind spots.

### Quadrant Fundamentalism

As you examine philosophy and thought, take care to observe positions that are in denial of, or firmly rooted in, particular Quadrants. Allergies and fixations. *Only consciousness and the mind exist. Only material reality exists. The self is unreal. The Universe is a simulation or illusion. God rights all wrongs. It doesn't matter what anyone thinks.* Recognize how these positions all express resistance to a major given aspect of reality. Though they may superficially sound like the dissolution of Quadrants of higher Levels and deeper States, *denial* of perspectives is the key discernment. Quadrant fundamentalism and denial are indicators of both Integral and clinical pathology. Not surprisingly, a moderate bias is typical of human personality.

### Consciousness Interfaces

Quadrants are conjugated outright in most languages, suggesting that an important distinction is reflected in perspectives: First, Second, and Third person, Singular and Plural. Classical milestones in human development include the formation of concepts of self, others, objectivity, and abstraction. In other words, the First Tier of Levels solidify consciousness into Quadrants. These four conjugations of reality are not only interconnected, but indeed are four reflections of a singular reality. For the Second Tier, Integral Levels, and particularly Turquoise, this entire discussion will seem familiar and matter-of-fact. The Quadrants model is an outstandingly elegant representation of the Turquoise worldview. This is precisely why the Turquoise holistic centaur is natively drawn towards spiritual transcendence. The "centaur" is resolving mind/body dualism, while "holistic" resolves individual/collective dichotomy. The vision-logic of this stage natively seeks a resolution to the fact of Quadrants. Accounts of spirituality and transcendent States can be generalized to key terms like "oneness", "union", "ego death", "boundlessness", "communion", "nondual," and of course, "transcendence" itself, all forms of seemingly paradoxical Quadrant synthesis. Awakening from the Quadrants is perhaps synonymous with spiritual enlightenment.

### Language Structures Thought

It's a subtle point, but language forces us to assign every mental object into subjective, objective, singular and plural expressions in order to communicate. We start to see why language can't express transcendence, and why transcendence confuses us so much. It seems odd to suggest that these suppositions at the fulcrum of my mind are imaginary mental constructs, not actually true, when they are entirely basic to my comprehension. I reveal to you now the true villain: language is a mental prison. Ego is a mental prison. Integral Theory is the mental prison's blueprints. When there is nothing outside of a prison, and everything desirable within, this becomes a blatantly bad analogy. Reality, in truth, is nothing like a prison, because there is nothing else. This is freedom.

### Using Quadrants

Most problems and pursuits, including philosophy itself, benefit from acknowledging and including all four metaphorical "dimensions" of reality. The main practical benefit is to recognize which Quadrants are focused on in a situation or approach, to zoom out holistically and integrate all four. We may find this far more difficult than it sounds, as we will be specifically acting away from our natural, prefered Type, or out of our comfort zone, in the most basic sense. An introvert may need to engage in expressive dialogue with large groups. A practical minded person might consider more emotional and cerebral perspectives. Perhaps a selfish person will be compelled beyond comfort to act on behalf of the many.

### Second Tier Marketing

**Who Is Integral For?** As a fun exercise, let's use Quadrants to analyze the appeal of Integral Theory.

**UL "I":** Integral is a path to holistic health and personal development. It explains how to improve one's moods, relationships, and lifestyle, how transcendental states of consciousness work, what they reveal, and it massively helps in the development of personal insight, spirituality, and maturity. Integral Theory delivers one of the most coherent and complete answers to date on one of our oldest philosophical questions: who am I?

**LL "We":** Integral is a community, or shared worldview Level, focused on the reconcilliation and inclusion of extant perspectives. According to author Ken Wilber, Integral is a natural Level of consciousness based around shared recognition of evolutionary structures and heirarchies of growth and inclusion. This "Teal generation" is the next major wave, or Level, emerging in culture currently. If all of this makes sense to you, you're a part of this wave to precisely that extent. No Kool-Aid to drink. If a map of the way humankind understands reality is recognizable and desired, the Integral "We" includes you.

**UR "It":** Ken Wilber provides a relatively simple, comprehensive philosophical orientation tool or ideological swiss army knife, enabling ready solutions to eternal problems. All extant concepts fit together in a single continuity, which applies very directly and progressively to every topic and field, including Wilber's work in philosophy, psychology, religion, spirituality, sociology, anthropology, politics, history, science, critical theory, arts, entertainment, health, and lifestyle. The key feature of Integral Theory is a map that inter-relates various expressions of personal development, displaying all the various paths to the good life in a single continuum.

**LR "Its":** Integral is like a Rosetta Stone for comprehending how fields and systems are inter-related in the grandest scope. Embracing all of reality, it is applicable to every endeavor, and is best used as a universal translater, a way of reconciling disparate perspectives and checking in with every aspect of the big picture. A grand survey, and a grand synthesis, of the global history of human thought, Integral Theory is a groundbreaking innovation to the Theory of Everything archetype. While not a core recognized figure in contemporary philosophy, Ken Wilber nevertheless offers an elegant vision of the core patterns, dynamics, and structures of nature, as expression and definition of an evolutionary systemic paradigm of reality. Recognizing developmental Levels, this paradigm natively attempts to upgrade extant paradigms through the stage process.

### Social Holon: A Stack of Four-Quadrant Levels

**A holon is a whole composed of parts, which also is itself part of a greater whole.** The Quadrants illustrate how a singular "holon" source unfolds in and expresses all four dimensions simultaneously, rendering all equally and entirely real. Everything certainly real exists in all four Quadrants and is a holon. Everything not real, by debatable standards, exists in some Quadrants, but not all, and thus is not a holon either. To say it another way, everything real is a holon. The nature of reality is holonic.
Examples of Debatably Real Things

**😡 Buloney:** A lie is an exclusively LL reality that is unreal to the subjective teller of it, and is untrue in physical reality UR. This would result in a misunderstanding where if you believed the lie, it would then be true only in your UL, but unreal from every other perspective. Also in this category: being wrong.

**🔮 Divination:** Astrology exists because we know of it and some of us believe in it. It may be fun, inspiring, and uplifting in those Left Quadrants as a way of seeing the unseen using only a birthday, but its claim in the Right Quadrants is based on the relative positions of celestial bodies. Since there is no logical causative mechanism, astrological typing is a mythological system in the LR, and false in UR empirical reality as scientific investigation has revealed no merit to astrological personality typing or predictions.

**👻 Ghosties:** An imaginary friend or hallucinated entity has a false status in the interior Quadrants, existing most probably as a projection of the personality of the subject (UL), incorrectly appearing to exist in objective reality (UR) as another conscious entity (LL). This entity is not objectively (UR) or inter-subjectively (LL) real, but if an "entity" encounter is not a hoax, we can only say for sure that this was a genuine UL experience that in nearly every case is refuted in the other three Quadrants. Near Death Experiences are entirely subjective by nature, so the best we can say is not that they are "real" or true, but they seem to be somewhat commonplace in the human UL experience of death. Projected entities are somewhat commonplace and can be healthy - we do it every night when we dream. So, this is not to "judge" things unreal, only to properly explain the requirements and parameters when someone asks, "are ghosts real?"

**🌲😉 Unsolved:** A person dies with a secret they never told anyone. The secret is entirely true, but nobody will ever find out, and it will never have any effect on anyone. Thus, it makes no difference whether one considers it real or not. Trees fall in the forest all the time. That's partially real as thought experiment, and it becomes fully real when "I" am aware of it, and "we" agree on it, and "it" makes logical sense that those "its" do that. It is okay to be partially unreal. We aren't coming down on unreality here. How real is the banana that I'm imagining right now? Partially. How real is this text? Fully real. I, we, it, and its *fully agree* that it is real. Otherwise, not sure.

### Quadrants within Quadrants

You got it? Let's get nuts! 🐿️ Nearly all perspectives we encounter are compound views. For example, if I describe my car to you, I'm describing an UR machine from my perspective, which is UL, but I'm trying to convey things of interest to you, implying a shared LL between us, and we may talk vehicle makes and models and market prices, all LR. The perspective you would end up with would be an UL memory of the LL shared between us, of the car existing in the UR and its LR attributes.

### Co-Arising Levels

The way we understand Levels can be an interesting indicator of our Quadrant preferences. Consider the many ways that the Altitudes can be described. You could look at Levels of UL consciousness, LL culture, UR lifestyle, LR society, and all of these can described in my UL consciousness development, in terms of the LL cultural milieu, in terms of UR behavior and technology, and as the LR basis of social organization. First, second, and third-person perspectives of themselves and one another. Each Quadrant is comprehended through each, for a total of 16 basic relational perspectives. It doesn't stop there. You can view Quadrants of Quadrants of Quadrants until you run out of RAM. For example, Level 2 Magenta in UL is how I thought when I was a toddler. UR is my ability to speak a language. LL is our magical lore and superstitions. LR is the contribution of early agrarian civilization to our current system. Let's say that I choose UR. Great. Now, I can describe how Magenta language-associating mind is implicated in my UL thought process, in UR Holidays and everyday superstitious rituals, in the LL orientation to life in terms of external reward and punishment, or in the LR fact of having division of labor and songs to sing.
### More of Reality in Fewer Words

Altitudes express distinctly in all four Quadrants, but may appear more or less relevant in each. For example, my personal Level is my primary lens in the UL, very important, but in LL culture, I'm only a tiny point of influence. Indeed, I learned Integral from LL. I'm a product of it. So, focusing on LL properly inclines us towards collectivist thinking. UL is more individualist. UR is pragmatic. LR is abstract. We see how Quadrant preference accounts for a lot of "isms" and ideological leanings, apparent paradoxes even, as in the case of free will versus determinism (UL and LR), the problem of evil (UR and LL), and the Hindu concept of Maya (all 4). This is where all of the seeming complexity of the model reveals its elegance. Integral Theory is a map of philosophy, of time, of reality, of consciousness, and it predicts that this general sort of self awareness, of having a map, is the character of Integral Levels. Turquoise Integral post-metaphysics chooses not to choose which of the competing truth claims should be honored, but instead embraces them all as partial truths contributing to development at various Quadrants and Levels. Turquoise intuits probably the most accurate generalization that can be made about reality, nature, the self, and society: it's an evolutionary unfolding of holonic Levels across interior, exterior, individual and collective perspectives. But you can't just go around saying things like that! 🤫 You see now why so much explanation is required to unpack these exceedingly simple Elements, as they begin to inter-relate and compound one another, it creates all the complexity there is.

### Everything Is Holons

A word of caution. ⚠️ We have challenged the world with the claim that all of reality is social holons, which means everything real appears at Levels in Quadrants. As we walk around looking at things in real life and trying to understand how they are holons, it is important to remember that we are intrinsically biased. We may have to introduce some further terms in order to comprehensively include all of reality without confusion. This is entirely due to us referencing things with a non-holonic linguistic comprehension. Many of our verbal concepts refer not to holons, but to **heaps** and **artifacts.**

🗻 A heap is a collective grouped by coincidental, arbitrary, or subjective distinction, such as a sand dune, the hundreds of words for "snow" arctic natives may use, or for example, "the birds on the lawn." Those references are not proper collectives (holons/Quadrants), as their group cohesion is not structural, but linguistic and contextual. The birds in the yard may exhibit collective behaviors, like if a horn honks, they all scatter, and they have come here because of the types of trees you have, eg. But the birds are a heap, not a holon, because they are grouped by the unrelated properties of being a bird, and being in this yard. Your memory is somewhat of a "heap" of human experience, just a collection of human events happening mostly at random, by coincidence, and due to circumstances largely outside of individual awareness or control, which unconscious processes have selected to either remember or forget. It becomes easy to see how most of the concepts we work with are deeply-layered abstractions that we assume to be just as "real" as the social holons which are reality. This sort of holonic confusion results from a perspective comprehending reality based on pre-Integral linguistic, mental, and social constructs.

✏️ An **artifact** is a collective assembled by a higher-Level social holon. A pencil, for example, has fallen very far from the tree that produced its wood. There is nothing in the nature of a tree or a forest that would suggest it would ever become a pencil, unless there were industrial peoples with sophisticated tools, rubber, graphite, and technological memes. We, the industrial humans at Level 5 rational, have transformed the low-Level materials of nature into a higher-Level tool of humanity. A "pencil" is not a social holon unto itself, like the materials it came from, or the people who manufactured it. It is an artifact which relates those holons. We have transformed it into an an expression of our own mental holon, what we call a "pencil," a Level 5 artifact. Likewise, a beehive would never arise naturally from its component substances, but is rather an artifact constructed by the instincts of bee colonies.

### It's Just Me, the World, and the Dog

Reflecting the inevitable bias of the human condition, most of our vocabulary refers to social memes which are deliberate practical assemblies of substances, or Altitude-ordered artifacts: chair, car, meal, garden, house, downtown, schedule, outfit, internet, story, disposition. The fabric that yoga pants are made of does not arise substantially in nature. It doesn't grow on trees. We had to invent words for it. So, we, these apes of the Earth, might call synthetic fabrics "unnatural" (or GMOs, detergents, plastics, airplanes, nukes, etc.). Well, it's quite natural for conscious human civilizations to reorder molecules in this way to show off their butts or mutually assure the destruction of civilization, whatever 🤷🏿‍♂️. Artifacts have a special status, in that they somewhat distort the integral perspective. Our mental world is a world of the practical and social, as opposed to natural (holonic) concepts. This is a main reason that holonic or Integral Theory may seem abstract or cerebral to newcomers, precisely because it is the opposite! All of reality is holons, but our awareness and the language we use necessarily surrounds us with heaps and artifacts, and that's great for everyday functions, but psychologically, it obscures the profound clarity that this grand symphony could be as simple as Levels and Quadrants. ☑️ You should now be able to identify everything in existence as social holon, heap, or artifact.

### Levels and Quadrants

A most fascinating aspect of Altitudes that it is easy to miss, is that they emerge in all four Quadrants. These underlying memetic holons, the core patterns of humanity, the spectrum or visible light range of history, occur in myself, in my own thoughts and feelings. They dictate the way stories are told, and critiqued, whether they are permissable. They deliver our tech base. These thoughts and feelings I have are the foundations of civilization and the drivers of civilization. There is an enormous global community sharing overall conceptions of the nature of reality with me, all throughout history. All great art and literature are expressions of Levels, sometimes challenging contemporary Levels, and sometimes contributing to emergent Levels. 🧬 A baby born now begins fundamentally the same as early hominids of the upper paleolithic, Level 1 Infrared instinctual, and will proceed through each of the Levels that society itself developed through. In each Level we observe somewhat of a reversal of Quadrant perspectives. The odd numbered Altitudes of Red, Orange, Teal, Indigo, and Ultraviolet stress forms of objectivity and individualism or agency, while Magenta, Amber, Green, Turquoise, Violet, and Clearlight stress subjectivity and collectivism or communion. This classically male/female dualism is not some magic spell built into the fabric of evolution, it is rather just the effect of a season-style pattern, a grasping at remote polarities, a spiral. In development, we cycle between extremes of thought, feeling, and action in an effort to synthesize or inhabit competing sides of cognitive dissonance. The developmental path is a process of integrating duality.

### Lines and Quadrants

In nearly every case, a particular developmental Line only studies or observes a single Quadrant. Thus, advances in medicine, psychology, social sciences, and economics appear to exist each in their own domain while of course they are all naturally implicated in one another. Integral portrays the overlap in these four perspectives, and in individual Lines, as Altitudes Levels.

### Types and Quadrants

The Big Five traits (Types) correlate with Quadrants, except for neuroticism. Many systems such as the enneagram use divisions of three to express fundamentally similar personality factors, most typically accomplished by squishing the right quadrants together, or by defining the intersection of Quadrants as points of reference. It would not be novel at all to say that many, perhaps the majority, of personality typologies, are descended from classical alchemical systems of three, perhaps five or more, but often four elements (earth, air, water, and fire) which correspond to the four secular seasons and formerly dominated type theory and medicine in systems East and West, corresponding to, for example, the four humors (bodily fluids) and temperaments. For convenience, we will continue with this European concept, but the basic strokes apply to medieval medicine in general. Sure, it sucks compared to modern medicine for healing illness; however, recall that Integral seeks to include ancient wisdom, and we must realize that these alchemical models were of a holistic nature, primitive maps of reality for a pre-medical people. These obscure antiquities foreshadow our current understanding. Among others, alchemical mythology helped Carl Jung to develop his own typology, which entirely informed the development of the Myers-Briggs system. Small world. There aren't a lot of accepted typologies in common usage, other than colloquial observational truisms of the nature, "You know, there's two types of people in this world, _____s, and _____s."

### Quadrant Typology

Observe particularly in the writings of Jung that this elemental typology, or the four cognitive functions, is equivalent to one's relationship with Quadrants. Meanwhile, we see exactly the same expressed in the East as Taoism. ☯️ The duality which exists on every Level of nature is expressed on Earth as seasons, in life as birth and death, in animals as sex and in people as gender. In personality, duality is expressed as extroversion and introversion. This primary preference is expressed through the duality of Judging and Perceiving. Judging makes conclusions with known information, Perceiving gathers new information. Judging has subjective and objective versions, which Jung called Feeling (based on subjective factors) and Thinking (based on abstract logic). Perceiving also has subjective and objective versions, where iNtuition works with the self abstraction and the unconscious, and Sensing gathers hard facts and data about the environment and social events. These three layers of duality generate Jung's Four Cognitive Functions, which each can be extraverted, expressed outwardly, or introverted, experienced internally. The table below shows the cognitive functions as equivalent to Quadrant preference.

## [HORI SECTION]

## Internal and External

---

Perhaps the most basic duality of the conscious mind is between "in here" and "out there." The **Internal** of reality is everything mental or subjective in nature, while the **External** refers to the objective and material. As we hope to demonstrate, it is easy to define this duality at the extremes, but the boundary can be more elusive (there is none.) Even though we conceptualize in Quadrants long before we are self-aware of it, they are nevertheless unreal mental constructs. Internal and External, subject and object, are opposite ways of looking at the same thing. In this sense, the Quadrants are yet another invisible interface, lens, or paradigm determining our reality with or without self-awareness.

### We Live In A Dream

*You think that's air you're breathing?* 🕶️ The apparent environment surrounding you is not the actual physical world. It's a mental construction, or a map, of your sense information, memory, knowledge, and assumptions, catering to what you focus on, are aware of, care about, and can handle. We as minds never experience anything but mind itself. Reality, to everyone, is mental in nature, and can only be comprehended through the limitations of a given consciousness. The objective or material world is a mental abstraction that we deduce from experience. In this sense, reality can be seen as entirely Internal.

### We Live in a Simulation

We can make the opposite point, collapsing reality to the External Quadrants. As a matter of fact, your apparent subjective consciousness is not the mind of any person at all. Subjectivity has no mass, charge, or measurable substance. You don't exist. This environment produced people, your family produced your body and named you this name and raised the person to believe they exist and are real. A room has a brain in it and the brain is detecting sensory information and supplying itself with infromation from memories and assumptions, all in service of generating this illusion that you exist and are experiencing this body, this environment, and this story of your life -- nothing more than electrical activity in the brain of any old homo sapiens.

### Everything Happening Gets To Be Real

We have made a dialectical argument here, showing two classically opposite arguments for the nature of reality to be equally compelling. We could call these perspectives Interior and Exterior Fundamentalism. Our mental conditioning as people causes the apparent paradox that the only thing we know is an illusion generating itself for no reason. The integral synthesis of our dialectic is to include both. Reality is always a relationship between Internal and External, and could not, would not exist without both. Tao is yin and yang as one.

### The Fundamental Split

Lots of insides, lots of outsides, no actual boundaries, such is the reality that we experience. It is nondual, but as we imagine it, it is dual, with "in here" and "out there," or Left and Right Quadrants. This is an interface, or framework, which structures our experience. Prior to social training in the interface, reality is experienced as an animalistic fusion of self and environment, and homo sapiens is any old instinctual baby, mostly useless to higher Levels. Quadrant awareness tends to mark maturity milestones. Throughout First Tier development, the Quadrants are differentiated and elaborated. Around Teal and Turquoise Levels, the Quadrants become self-aware. In the Third Tier, and in spiritual States, a deeper, higher, more supreme or ultimate reality is discovered, and the experience is often compared to Waking Up from sleeping, dreaming, delusion, or a trance. Nondual unity, ego death, oneness, communion -- these are descriptions of a pure, absolute reality without Quadrants. "I and the father are one," "I am that I am," etc. It is often described poetically, because this is a non-conceptual, non-linguistic, non-knowledge phenomenon, and attachment to those forms is a primary obstacle. At Second Tier, however, we can model, or paraphrase this, as Quadrants.

### Centauric Integration

The centaur, like us, is a person's mind and an animal's body. This is no paradox or riddle, just Quadrants. Free will and determinism are both perfectly true. They are internal and external perspectives on the unfolding of events. Every internal choice we make is calculated by causative external events, and our decisions cause real impact, even though our only choice is to end up making the choices we will make. Making choices doesn't create physical parallel universes in which we made other choices. It does create abstract hypotheticals, in our minds. It also demonstrates that consciousness participates in objective matter, and objective matter participates in consciousness, as this is, not even secretly, a nondual reality.

### Conscious Participation is a Force of Nature

Your choices are just as real and causative as any natural force. It isn't the case that your choices don't "matter" because your destiny is calculated by physics. That's like saying love is boring because it's calculated by reproduction. Category error. That your choices matter is an aspect of nature, a part of the structure of the kosmos, if you care, and if you say so. You're the sole being that certainly makes choices. Your certainty is the only certainty, as far as you're concerned. A black hole is pretty hardcore, but it can only fall. How can I get a black hole to accomplish anything, without a human mind involved? A tornado truly has no control over its actions. From this perspective, and objectively, human choice is the most powerful force in the known universe, in terms of its capabilities, because it's the first force of nature that can intentionally accomplish anything. And from here, we see a progression of Levels. I can squash the ant. Power. But I can also let it go. More power. I could get food with the money, or I could invest it. Power. *Who am I, and what should I do?* Now, that's power!

### Quantumization of Philosophy

As a culture, we seem to fall deeper and deeper into denial of the only thing that surely exists, consciousness. The only answers we trust come from the material sciences, dealing with a world we do not know, at a scale we do not experience. We wonder if science can discover the nature of mind in the mathematical abstractions suggested by the behavior of things so tiny that the notion of observation becomes nonsensical. Scientists can study the brain, and the microcosmic, but there's no profit in the nature of mind. That's not science's role. It's ours. Scientists don't waste their time or resources on this.

### The Universe is Being Us

The evolving cosmos is a factory that transforms matter into mind, according to itself... me. We wouldn't be here if it didn't do that. But why? Does it like doing that? Let's ask. I'm some universe. Do I like doing this? I'm glad to be alive -- yes, the universe likes being conscious. There is no philosophical problem here. We have no choice but to participate in the universe's evolution from matter to life to mind and onward, because we like it. Very matter-of-fact and not weird to consider, but we are entrenched in dualistic, Orange thinking, and tend to limit our concern with consciousness. One might assume we would be curious to comprehend what we are, but we see through lenses -- our concerns are shadows on the cavern walls. The methodologies of science develop our knowledge of Right Quadrants; how brains work, genetic and environmental factors, conditioned responses. Consciousnessness is left to philosophy, psyche to psychology, mysticism to spirituality, and values to literature. This is appropriate. The philosophy of "scientism," (Orange reductionism of Interiors to Exteriors) is a limited worldview that disqualifies half of reality. Science concerns itself with the causative forces of nature. The mind is natural, and supremely causative. Mental science can be Right Fundamentalist, or it is the simple application of analytical logic to insight in all Quadrants, whch is Integral Theory.

### Am I Brainwaves or Experience?

Yes. Consciousness and brainwaves are not coincidental, they are the coemergent Right and Left, and this is always the relationship between them. The Interior and Exterior perspectives can't exist without each other. Without a brain, there is no experience of anything. Since a brain is here braining, there is self-consciousness. Infrared, the first Level of an infant or an archaic hunter-gatherer, arises from an instinctual animal fusion consciousness, to differentiation of self from environment. It must truly be understood that this pivotal evolution is only an interface, a mental configuration, so entrenched that people find this kind of talk crazy. Truly, our sensory experience does not naturally differentiate self from environment. We do it so fast and habitually that we are unaware of it. This sense of subjectively being in here, facing a world out there, is the vertical axis of the Quadrants. Experience is the Upper Left, "I" Quadrant. This environment, which you only experience in an abstract sense, through processing sensory information and recognizing patterns in it, is the Right or external "It" Quadrants, or objective reality.

### Conscious Kosmos

Expand your notion of the cosmos to include consciousness, or holonic interiority, and this is the Integral "kosmos." The universe is a creator. This is its actual character. We are all one character, creating mental beings out of nowhere. Watch what it does next. I'm watching. Go. The universe falls and dissipates, but as a kosmos, it also naturally falls upward. We call it eros, or evolutionary impulse to ascend to higher Levels. Simply due to the nature of reality, a planet like Earth falls into life. Life eventually falls into sentient civilization. On accident. The prevailing scientific perspective is that the origin of life on Earth, the evolution of life towards more progressive forms, life becoming self aware, self-awareness forming civilizations -- all emerge on accident just because. In a cold, dead, empty, remote, unconscious, probabilistic universe, these accidents appear miraculous! Falling upward. Several big, huge flukes, all similar in character, all meta-structures that transcend and include prior structures, just an astronomical coincidence which comes but once in billions of years in billions of galaxies. To the contrary, Teal Integral views these "miracles" as connected thematically and aligned with a ubiquitously consistent core pattern of nature. The ordinary dynamics of an evolutionary progression of holon Levels produce apparent miracles.

### Proto-Consciousness Quadrants

The interiority of Quadrants goes all the way down. This is not to suggest that atoms are conscious like we are, but that the nature of consciousness is understood through Levels. As complex mental beings, our interiority is readily self-apparent. I think therefore I am. But what about a cat? 🐈‍⬛ A cat doesn't think, but it might "am" somewhat, and it has a personality of sorts. We know that we share the brain functions of social emotions and instinct with "higher" animals. What about plants? 🪴 Do plants experience in some way? Well, they respond to stimuli. They respirate. Is there a sort of soul in all of life? Whatever soul is, there are Levels of it, in the experience of being a person, bug, plant, virus, or molecule. Perhaps we can accept that the material being of a thing lends it more of a sense of informational existence (Interiority) than nothing at all? The truly holistic Turquoise view of reality is illustrated below, again as an Integral stack of holon Levels in four Quadrants. 

## [VERT SECTION]

## Individual and Collective

---

It's easy to overlook the universality of pattern repetition. There are countless molecules, countless stars, countless people, countless perspectives, countless brain states. Each has statistical differences, but each conforms to the general rules that define it. Every star is similar enough to be called a star. We can consider the star, the person, the idea, as an **Individual** entity, an instance of the pattern, or as a **Collective** entity, a representative of the pattern itself. Whether you consider me an invidual person, or an ideology or business, reflects the Upper and Lower Quadrants of our relationship.

### Categories and Instances

If you point out a single horse to me, I can now identify horses succesfully. They're all like that. It's not that using nouns to name things forces them into conceptual groups, but that everything in reality is replicated from the same fundamental memes. In this sense, nature is profoundly uncreative, but thankfully clumsy. At Magenta, "horse" is a magic spell which binds the animal to the horse spirit form. Level 2 identifies the "horse" ideal readily, without knowing how. At Level 5, Orange science defines a horse specifically, and how those traits come to be from genotypes. No matter which Level, there is a horse instance and a horse category. This is true of anything that can be named, or everything possible to discuss. Category patterns (ideals/archetypes/nouns) co-generate with the instances which are apparent. There is nothing in reality without a collective. There is no plant without a species, no person without family, no books without publishers, no melody without harmony. There aren't a plethora of Substance-generating holons: it's always molecules. There is no Life or Mind that is not arising from, and built of, molecules. Everything in reality has individual features and details, but there is no true uniqueness within the generative constraints of reality.

### External Collectives: Lower Right

Universe atoms form our material galaxy and star system. Earth's molecules condense into mountains, flow as rivers, move as winds, transform as plasmas, and some participate in life, forming the biosphere. The kingdoms of creatures show collective patterns, expressions of collective trends in Darwinian success, down to the level of stable species which can interbreed. A tree is part of a forest. That forest is part of a biome. A squirrel interacts with trees, and the squirrel economy, and bugs, etc. Various collectives and organizations form within and across species, particularly in higher mammals. With humanity, the collective plays a unique role in educating or Growing Up the individual through the Altitudes Levels of Mind, and this results in the complicated political, beaurocratic, and membership roles that we participate in. A flock of birds illustrates collective movement as they each adapt to one another's motions. An entire species can thrive or become extinct. This collective reality may affect the decisions of individuals. An angry person may do things they ordinarily wouldn't do as a participant in an angry mob. I owe taxes because I am a citizen of a nation.

### Internal Collectives: Lower Left

I participate in Integral Theory, as does your opinion. We are presently participating in one another's lives. As we experience events together, we each have separate mental experiences, and the collective total of our experience, through communication, reveals more reality, potentially, than each individual's experience. The sum total of human knowledge and perspective is infinitely superior to that of the individual, but unfortunately, communication greatly limits our ability to share, and to receive. We each walk around with a tiny, hazy pinhole sliver of the collective comprehension.

### Whole Individual vs Collective Part

Extraversion and introversion outcomes demonstrate that the communicated views of an incidental collective are neither clearly superior nor inferior to any individual's own native capacities. Individualism and Collectivism are not competitors. They supplement one another. The integrated mind is ambidextrous. To be smarter, be easier. To be easier, be smarter. Everything that a mental being can think, feel, or do is an expression synthesized patterns, memes, ideals, or archetypes. A mental being is limited to only those functions which exist in its mental reality.

### Matter and Substance

A molecule can be seen in terms of its individual structure, or in terms of its relationship with other molecules. Here, we can point out a subtle misunderstanding which is common. The molecule, like everything, has a holonic nature. There is a special sort of "collective" (social holon) formed by atoms grouping together into molecules, and these molecules form a sort of collective to make cells. In the Integral view, these are Levels, *not* Quadrants. The Lower Right collective of an Upper Right atom is not a molecule or a chair or everything inside the planet's atmosphere, but the universe itself, or whatever you consider the entire collective of atoms. Atoms, molecules, cells, tissues, organs, instincts, and self-concepts are Levels of material reality that compose themselves holonically - by including individual wholes as parts into individual wholes which each themselves have collective social dynamics at each Level. At the Level of molecules, we can see that molecules exert forces and have interactions with one another. They can align into magnetic or chrystalline configurations, they may exchange atoms and ions with one another, they exhibit material states and chemical dynamics. Where there is consciousness, there will be molecules transmitting electrical and chemical signals in a cellular brain organ.

### Conscious Collectives

The meta-Level of Life contains bands of genetic organization which enable an organic substance to behave utterly different from lower substances - *it's alive!* Organic structures, or creatures, have instinctual consciousness, catering to their role in the web of life. Ecological dynamics train instinctual behavior. As we transition into the meta-Level of Mind, our collective is no longer our Life-Level biosphere -- we are also trained by human socialization, making us categorically different from any other creature. We may be tempted to identify the collective of an individual as the Earth, because it physically contains our physical bodies. The Earth and myself have Levels. I'm a social holon, Earth is a heap (the molecules which fell into this orbital band of the sun after much smashing around.) Earth is a rare planet, possibly unique at this moment, in that it has Mind Levels right now. Other than that, utterly typical planet on an unremarkable star in a random galaxy, far as we know. Thinking of Mind and Life as geological or astronomical is category error, as we are fundamentally not like other planets or molecules. This is how higher Levels look from lower Levels. They are rare and strange, alien pioneers in a savage frontier. Yang, penetrating the sacred heart of yin. Hero in the labyrinth where the snake encircles the treasure. Social holons. We're the product of the deliberate intentions of cultural and social systems. The way we see the world was modeled and taught. Knowledge is what *this* person has been exposed to since infancy. It's who they are. You're the one who acts out your perspective and values in real life. You're the response to this. Whatever you say is what people say.

### Levels of One and Many

Collective atoms are the universe. Earth is a coincidental molecular heap in the solar system in the Milky Way 🍫. I'm not part of Earth, my cells are part of Earth. I'm an ego person, whose collective is society and culture. I'm not a Collective of my cells (the cell collective is the biosphere). I'm a Level of my cells. Atoms, molecules, and cells are Levels of people, and likewise people are extremely rare potential Levels for atoms, molecules, and cells. The atoms and molecules of my body are Individual pieces of universe, and are also holonic Levels of myself. My cells are Individual bits of Earth's biological life, and also a holonic Level of myself. My body is a replication of the homo sapiens genotype, so its collective is my species. Primate, mammal, vertebrate, and animal are Levels of my genes. My self-aware human brain puts me at an extremely advanced Level that is not found elsewhere in the Universe, in chemistry, or in other animals. The holonic Levels of Mind, or Altitudes, only occur in people as far as we know. The collective of me is us, not Earth, not the universe. The collective of us, humanity, is not Earth or the Universe, but rather, we *are* the people collective, or collective consciousness.

### 🐔 Chicken and Egg 🥚

A question that insists on the discernment of Upper and Lower Quadrants. They came together. The first chicken to lay chicken eggs was the first chicken. 🍗🍳 We think of ourselves as individual, isolated selves, and yet we all have that in common. This self-concept arises from exposure to the collective. Ego is a story, but only one character in the greater stories of family, country, homo sapiens, Earth, and the kosmos itself. We are a collective protagonist. 

## [UL SECTION]

## Upper Left: Interior Individual

---

Thoughts, feelings, intuitions, and sensations directly experienced by the individual. The UL cannot be conveyed in an absolute sense, and is physically unreal. Examples include a dream, a sense of familiarity, and sexual attraction.

### UL Applications

The UL can be developed through meditation, contemplation, facing fears, and creativity. Psychology offers us pathways to insight, as spiritual disciplines reveal astounding domains of the unconscious. Our personal style, tone, temperament, type, mood, or feel are all aspects of our UL that spill across into the LL cultural domain and become descriptive of our individual character. Experience is the UL of our UR brain functions.

### UL Health

Self-honesty forms the basis of self worth and personal integrity. Self-assessment of needs, desires, and mysteries offer endless exporation into our personal subconscious depths. The intuitive function of the mind is simply to experience mental content without a goal in mind, and we gain familiarity, coordination, and depth in the intellectual realm.

### UL Pathology

Overly strong UL preference may express narcissism, isolation, social eccentricity, neuroticism, or poor tact. Excess introspection can result in depression and alienation. A lack of focus on external and collective Quadrants can limit personal success and interpersonal connection.

### Levels in the UL

Individual consciousness develops through a holonic progression of stages of self conceptualization. Each stage builds upon the previous self concept via integration of prior assumptions into a new pattern. Our ordinary perspective zooms out to competing perspectives, forming a new perspective which includes the previous parts into a more whole synthesis. This can again be integrated into a meta-perspective which transcends but includes the previous. Each Level creates a new "subjective" and "objective" reality by including previous subjective realities as objects in a new awareness.

### Evolving Four Selves

Altitudes unfold according to a holonic, or dialectical, synthetic process. As you can see, twelve stages is complicated. In our simplified Four Selves mini-model, we reduce lower Level UL experience to **Personality:** a response, or reaction, to reality in the moment. The collective personality is everyone paying attention right now, that we're aware of. Through experience, Personality develops a cohesion of moods and priorities, and an awareness of the causal mechanics of the world. It begins to recognize itself as **Ego**, the reasonable agent experiencing a personal narrative over the course of a lifetime in relationship with others and history. Ego's collective is all people who have anything to do with one another, whether they know it or not. As Ego gains awareness of intuitive uniting abstractions, and the invisible forces underlying mental activities, it develops towards a total **Psyche** affinity. The psychic being's collective is all of form and consciousness. An integrated Psyche can proceed through transcendental State practice into identity with the entire Kosmos, or absolute **Consciousness** without subject or object. In each case, it is a matter of healing the cognitive dissonance of a fundamental split in reality, or duality of the mind, by embracing and integrating the supposed opposing side. Tao is all four at once. As we develop, we not only expand our personal self sense, we also embrace a more inclusive collective identity. 

## [UR SECTION]

## Upper Right: Exterior Individual

---

Particular objects, items, and nouns of a physical or objective nature compose the UR Quadrant perspective. People show up in the UR as physical bodies and behavioral agents.

### UR Applications

UR is the domain of skilled trades, logistics, accounting, applied science, construction, engineering, medicine, investigation, deductive logic and procedural reasoning. The UR is often methodical, more comfortable working within standard logical roles, rules, and methods. A person who prefers UR sensing will be practical, logical, handy, reasonable, detailed, simple, and objective. They might be socially aloof, lacking personal insight or depth, and not very intellectual or abstract, but their rooting and groundedness in the Earthly realm of the material and symbolic personal currencies makes them sturdy, dependable, technical, and succesful. UR preference makes us pursue clear knowledge, often to transform and organize physical environments. Dialogue and analysis may feel like a waste of time, as the real test is where the rubber meets the road.

### UR Health

While much of the information that reaches consciousness may be abstract, emotionally colored, dishonest, misunderstood, or fake, there is an absolute certainty in the solidity of the desk in front of me. The UR is concrete and certain, so for the more extraverted and cerebral, it may be beneficial to take a moment and simply sense the reality occuring in this environment and body, and to celebrate the power we have as physical entities to build, design, destroy, and optimize the things around us. Healthy UR enjoys cooking a meal, bare feet on the grass, small quiet gatherings, and celebrating small victories.

### UR Pathology

The key pathologies are acquisitiveness and alienation. Both individualistic and materialistic, excess UR is fixated on apparent personal gains. Other perspectives may seem abstract, uncertain, fruitless, and isolation may lead to self medication patterns attempting to hack the physical chemistry of the body. Disinterest in larger and grander narratives may result in superficial or transactional relationships lacking intimacy or challenge. The Earthly tendency can become obsessive about money, health, and other currencies. They may enjoy sharing their wealth strategy and status, which can come off as boastful. They may exhibit a deficiency mindset, constantly looking for what is wrong. They may be suspicious and worryful, cronically despairing the loss or dwindling of their various currencies.

### The Co-Arising Self

Regardless of what else might be happening, we can all agree that experience occurs when a human body generates the characteristic brainwave patterns of consciousness. Whatever happens in that brain is simultaneous with your experience of being. In common speech, we use the word "I" to refer to both our mind and body, and we call our brain "It". You can remove most of your body and still be "I," which literally *is* the brainwaves. Yet the brain is an "it," because the brain is our generator, not our vehicle. Body and personality are vehicles. We have no trouble thinking of our car or our video game character as "I," because we do the same thing with our body. Notice our Quadrants Interface at work. We never call the game cartridge, the television, or the controller "I." We don't call the car's engine, tires, or radio "I." My hand is not "I."

### Interior and Exterior Brain

The brain really isn't "I", from the experience of itself in the UL Mind. We didn't even realize consciousness was generated by the brain until relatively recently. At present, the best expert in the world has a tough time making any sense of the relationship between physics and chemistry in the brain and the subtle operations of the mental Psyche. Nobody looks at your physical brain to understand your thoughts. This would require an Interface that has not yet been developed.

### Stages of Brain Function

For simplicity, we refer to the UR physical brain system by vocabulary that comes more from UL self concepts like Personality, Ego, Psyche, and Consciousness. In this context, we mean these structures as analogies for the generative neuron configurations and various other physical factors. In order to give these brain States proper names or categories, scientists would first need to adopt the Levels system, and then they could measure and analyze the brain and give us lay people better descriptions of the physical changes that occur at each Altitude. In the States section, we discuss preliminary work which references EEG brainwave pattern generalizations in relation to transcendental States of consciousness. Not surprisingly, enlightenment expresses major changes to how the brain works. Without the participation of the hard sciences to help Integral assign brain metrics into structural categories relating to *all* of the Integral Elements, our basic terms should suffice to account for the structural reality of physical neuro-cognitive functions as our nature in the Individual Exterior Quadrant. 

## [LL SECTION]

## Lower Left: Interior Collective

---

This is the domain of culture and interpersonal relationships. Every person is taught to be a person by their parents, their peers, their educators and guardians. The personality and self are not original creations, but a system of mimmicked habits, or memes, consciously and unconsciously taught to us by culture. The heros and villains, celebrities, and important individuals in our lives become a sort of collective story, an overall narrative involving a team of relevant characters, the "We". The We ultimately "writes the history books", or decides what is important, what is moral, what is a true accomplishment, and what is worthy of looking at. Through the lens of the LL Quadrant, reality is a network of relationships, and we aim to maximize our role in that network.

### LL Applications

The collective interior is the domain of communication, team building, public relations, social and literary criticism, politics, motivation, persuasion, sales, marketing, and being an overall cool, interesting, appropriate and likable person. LL is often synonymous with "people skills," "street smarts," or "soft skills".

### LL Health

LL preference will result in a sense of connectedness, and a tendency to attract opportunities, praise, acknowledgement, and consideration. Focusing on cultural realities and engaging interpersonally may help a person get out of their own head and feel like a part of something greater, as well as offering great diversity of perspectives.

### LL Pathology

A person fixated on LL may feel lost in relationships, subsumed in community, hollow, phony, lacking genuine ability or insight, or lacking personal agency, preference, or identity. The need for social stimulation may result in an inability to focus or accomplish goals independently without extrinsic reward. A lack of grounding in positive self-appraisal can come off as needy or dependent, and may result in dishonest, unethical behaviors for the sake of superficial approval.

### LL as Extraversion

Strongly extraverted individuals do not prefer, perhaps even fear, to experience their own isolated depths. They call it loneliness and boredom, and prefer to experience through communication, as a group, achieving goals through persuasion, manipulation, and charisma, based on shared understanding, agreement, and values. While introverts experience UL as freedom and LL as constraint, extraverts experience UL as emptiness and LL as action. An extravert feels more whole or real in a group because their mental self is oriented to the LL. In dependent relationships, beaurocratic cronyism, and cults, the collective identity is considered preferable to the personal, but LL preference is also expressed by socialites, philanthropists, managers, teachers, and influencers. 

## [LR SECTION]

## Lower Right: Exterior Collective

---

The "Its" perspective views reality in terms of abstract objective systems. The LR cognitive function is thinking, or using inductive reasoning to conceptualize organizational patterns in phenomena. This Quadrant is typically the most difficult to grasp, but a primary point of interest for Second Tier. When reality is conceptualized as holons, the LR reveals nothing less than the functional meaning and purpose of the kosmos, or the "thoughts of God," according to some idiot.

### LR Applications

LR orientation is suited to inductive reasoning. It manifests a sort of mastermind, diplomat, or executive character. This person is ideally suited for making difficult decisions, as they are less influenceable and sensitive to interpersonal outcomes due to their objectivity and appreciation for the occasion's ultimate insignificance. Introverted LR expressions may be more suited for complicated and multifaceted occupations like software coding, law, medicine, economics and consulting.

### LR Health

We pressure ourselves to improve in the UL. We feel peer pressure in the LL. We have material and bodily needs in the UR. The LR motivates our desire to participate in the progress of history, to better the entire system without regard for self, obstacles, or limitations. There is a natural sense of reward and success, some might even say agape or elation, when one's actions align with the progress of civilization or the improvement of nature.

### LR Pathology

A fixation in LR can lead to a person lacking personal sentiment or grounding in social and immediate physical reality. This person may be viewed as lacking personality beyond their social role or occupation, and no interest in other people beyond advancing the position of their eternal chess game. Objectification and commodification of people can become antisocial or manipulative at the extremes.

### Holographic Civilizations

From the LR Integral perspective, I am an instance of my Level of consciousness. I continue to exist at all other LR Levels, of course, thus my atoms are part of the universe's physical system. As an animal, my body is part of the web of life. As a species, my collective is homo sapiens. As Magenta, my linguistic archetypes are the lore of oral tradition. As Red, my personal pride and attitude are individualised versions of family and neighborhood legend. As Amber, I am indoctrinated with Western Judeo-Christian and European colonialist values against my will. As Orange, I am educated and part of the continuing American democratic revolution, participating in reasonable transactions with other free citizens. As Green, I am a critical agent of ironic deconstruction and pluralistic sensitivity. I am the Second Tier collective by the act of understanding and caring about Integral Theory, and deliberately transmitting the Teal meme.

### LR Today

As each Altitude builds technology, systems of organization, physical and political infrastructure, the next meme simply builds on top of that. Our communications technology, including internet, mobile, and social media, emerged as the tech base of Green Meme. A Level of the LR is a fundamental shift in tech paradigm. Orange introduced technologies that help us measure and calculate, a democratic social system that maximizes personal liberty and responsibility, and enormous innovations that increased the productivity, scale, scope, and efficiency of industry. Green brings us technology to communicate and connect globally, to express, criticize, dialogue, and influence. The technology of Teal meme should be expected to emerge as tools, infrastructure, and organizational frameworks that reflect an awareness of Levels of development, such as perhaps non-commercial web sites that teach Integral Theory. 