# MAGENTA ZONE
## CHAPTER ONE

The cavern's central den was now fully illuminated. The man looked around, yawning, then rose and humped across his nest, feeling a chilly draft wash over his entire body. His path twisted through the tight cave with its soft walls until he could not see back. This was where the spider had shown him to pee. He stood over the trough, pointing his tummy finger at the slanted folds in the sloping floor and jetting out a current of transparent fluid. 

He still felt uneasy about losing part of his insides into the ground. Pooping was even more troubling. It had taken many lessons before he could tolerate dropping his excrement into a hole. But the alternative, being messy, was far worse. And the smell. As long as he kept getting fed, it seemed he would not become smaller or waste away. The poop went away, and it made room for food. The gross parts of his insides kept plopping out, and he no longer grieved for them, or worried where they went after falling down the hole.

The spider showed him that it was good to be clean. She had taught him to wipe with the warm, wet cloth. "Clean," the spider would say. "Clean, CLEAN!" until finally the man displayed the rinsed and wrung wash cloth with no spots on it. "Clean," he would say back, imitating the rough, mechanical clicks and whines of the foot-sized machine. With her little body and face, and her tiny complicated mouth parts, he did not understand how she talked. She did not seem smart, like he was. She did not seem curious. She never needed anything. She had crawled in through the walls to feed him when he hungered. She showed him many things and many words, roving around with her eight silly, clicking legs - going occasionally up the walls and into the folds of the corners, leaving him alone. 

"Clean," the man said to himself, rubbing the sleep out of his eyes. He passed again through his nest, and off into the play area. In here, there were many colors of light, and materials of all sorts, from rough to harsh, bouncy to clingy. There were pegs to climb up the walls, and spongey tendrils that he could bury himself in. Many of his toys were attached, so he could not take them away. A beautiful sound echoed from far off. A sort of wavy, hypnotic thing, always different. 

Sometimes, he would dance his body around to the sound, like the spider had shown him, but he did not want to play or dance today alone. He was becoming hungry, and this frightened him. He wanted to go and see if the spider was around, but she was making him feel cross. She must have known he was hungry. She always knew. 

She would come. He played through his ritual, alternately relaxing, pondering, and busying himself moving objects around, stretching them, chewing on them, climbing through them. A great time passed, and the hunger nagged. He cuddled into a curve of thick fur, staring at the patterns on the walls glowing in various roving colors of twinkling lights. Many little shapes, like scratches into the wall. He went to run a finger across one of the tiny symbols. It lit up, growing brighter as he squealed in surprise. 

"Eee," came a familiar, mechanical burp. He turned and saw the spider standing at attention at the edge of the play area. His heart leapt with excitement, and he sped over to meet her. She seemed to retract in an automatic response to his giant lumbering mass, but soon straighted out to allow him to pet her hard, solid coat. "Help," she said.

He beemed at her, then rushed back to show her the glowing shapes on the wall. There were times when he would show her things, and she would applaud him by clacking her many legs on the floor, causing him to laugh uncontrollably. He brought his finger up to a fat symbol with a tail, causing it to glow brightly.

"Gee," the spider said, and the G sparkled.

The man fell still, pondering. For the first time, he wondered how many words the spider knew. She could not make as many sounds as he could, but she seemed to know of many things. He had no way to say this to her. As usual, she stood attuned to him, waiting.

"One, two, three, four words," he said. "No know." She cocked sideways for a moment, then returned to rest. After a pause, she bounced up again. "Letters," came the scratchy sound of something inside her tiny face.

He looked from the wall back to her. "Yes! One, two, three let... letters." He pointed at the various shapes, and the spider shot back, "Em! Aye! Whye!" until the man was unable to remember any of them, and he turned angry instead of excited. It was as though the whole play room had become cold, quiet, and distant, and he wanted to go do some other thing. There was one other thing he could do, but he did not like it.

The lesson went on and on, and it seemed like the spider wanted to learn letters forever. She never offered to feed him. She never told him how many words, either. Just letters. There were ten twice of them, fingers *and* toes. He started giving letters to parts you normally wouldn't count. 

When he could take no more, he centered his fury on the little beast, still sagging gently forward. She leaned up and studied his face, a set of little gemstone eyes peering out emptily, rolling their glint in his direction as she she studied him. He threw his hands up in a sudden tantrum. "Feed, feed! Mad, sad, feed."

She took a few steps back, and his cheeks flushed as he glared at her. 

"No," she said.

"What?" he demanded. He asked again. She shrank to the ground, then attemped to turn, but he lunged at her and swatted her with his big, tight hand. He felt her delicate weight immediately lift under the blow, and her tiny skeletal body shot back into the cave, twisting onto its side and clattering into the far wall. His hand throbbed instantly as he looked toward her, horrified. For a moment, she shifted unevenly and stumbled, then collapsed again. His heart flooded with shame, but it was too late. 

His vision turned fuzzy and filled with black spots. He leaned and fell back onto his bottom as the curse spread from his hand, landing on the soft cushion of the cave floor. The spider made no sounds. He was alone with his shame and pain. Where he had struck her, his hand sung with violent, shooting pains. They radiated in maddening patterns, seeming to exit his body and hurl pain everywhere around him. 

Her poison lasted long so he would remember. At times, it flared up so bad that he could do nothing but lie down and breathe. But then it would let up, and he could move around and be peaceful. Nothing felt better than when the evil wore off. The pain was merciful, and fair. He never believed it at first, but relief came only long after he understood the lesson. He knew better than to hurt the spider. Their pain was the same.

She was gone. She had left him without food. He would hurt without food, drenched in the shame of his violence, nursing the wound he had caused. Some time later, she would return. Like it never happened. He never wanted to stay cross with her, but sometimes she left for so long that he despaired she might not come back.

If there was no way out of this punishment, the best he could hope for was a longer hunger than he had ever known. The only place left to go was the cave's third room. 

He entered the tall, tight area, and came to the three things. There appeared to be a matching opening on the far side, but it was blocked fast with a perfectly shaped piece of wall that could not be forced away. On the center of this unusual wall segment, there was a straight pattern of dark little markings. As with everything else, it just simply was there. He did not understand. 

In the center of the room was the raised platform. Looking down into it, there was a transparent material which he could see through, but he could not force it open or break it. His fingernails struck it with a dull, unaffected thud. He could see that inside, there was a flat circle of some strange magical material. He had at first thought the magic item contained some other place, but actually, it only showed the ceiling above. It had startled him, when that frightening creature had entered, that face. It was only the man himself. And yet, it had been upsetting. He had required soothing. He peered into it now, and cautiously watched his own face slide into view. It stared back into his eyes with his own face, flooding his emotions. It felt unsafe, as though the other threatened to replace him. 

His face was light orange, just like his hands and tummy. There was his brown hair. Somehow, he did not look how he expected, although he had never known how he looked. This body was beautiful. His body. Extraordinary. It almost felt wrong to him, to be this stranger, but who else would he be?

There must be some reason for the magic item being here, showing him this. It had seemed evil all this time, but maybe it was another helper. With more help, he wouldn't have to worry as much about food. The spider never entered the third room. She was unable. He had forced her to try once, and she had punished and abandoned him for that, too. 

He looked back at the strange wall across from the entrance, and it was like a tiny explosion went off in his mind. Those shapes on the door—he had noticed them before, but they had meant nothing. He had only wondered how they got there, and whether the spider had made them. "Letters," he said quietly. 

The certainty possessed him as surely as light returned each morning to let him see. He must look into the magic item and say the letters, revealing what words they are. They could be magic words. Accounting for everything in the room, the words must open the wall into another place. That place might be any kind of place. It might be a bad place, never to be opened. He remembered again that the spider never came in here. 

All at once, he felt himself flush with a stab of fear, as though that upside down man was still watching, and it was not him, but someone else. His muscles tensed in panic and he seemed to shrink into the solemn room's ground. He did not dare look into the magic item now, to make sure the other still followed. A place deep inside was shouting at him to run, imagining some monstrous thing suddenly crashing through the wall to take him. His imagination was not always true, but the feeling was as overpowering as the taste of poop. This was a bad place.

The man darted back to his nest and hid under the covers, weeping. After much agony, he sat up numbly, staring daggers at his throbbing hand, reminding himself the spider was only mean when he was mean to her first. So far. She was dumb, she was annoying, but so far she had always known the way. She could not break. She'd taken worse hits than that one earlier. She disappeared, and she came back. Off to repair herself, leaving him in a bad, scary place. The unbreakable, dumb thing, she always knew. 

But if he had it wrong, and she hated him or feared him and never came back, the pain of needing food would only grow worse and worse. Not even water would help. Without the spider, there was nothing to eat. He thought for a moment about capturing the spider, taking her food whenever he pleased, but immediately he felt shame and fear, as thought the walls themselves could hear his plans. He pondered over his aching hand, long into the dark period without light, because the pain stopped him from sleeping at times, and his attention was split between the spider's cursed venom and the gnawing feeling of emptiness in his tummy. 

When the light came back, he lumbered around his nest under the constant burden of the spider's absence. He wanted her so badly, he nearly yearned to prove his good behavior. Just to see her. Just to feed. Not only that, he felt very sorry. Her pain, whatever it must be, was like an extra weight on top of his own. His face puffed up with tears, choking his head with snot. There was no reason to cry, since he was alone, but he heaved in a soft rhythm, and emptied out his big feelings, and he decided that he wanted nothing more sorely than forgiveness. He had never gone so long without eating, and still he wanted the hunger, his payment for what he had done. He stayed in bed so long, the lights went out again. Restless, alone in total darkness, he finally began to wonder if perhaps he *had* broken her. Or maybe she did hate him. His tears never ran out, but after working through each horrible thing, he entered a sort of calm serenity. He felt like the poop scrubber coming up without spots. He had flushed himself with tears, wrung himself out in agony, and on his best behavior, he was only what he was.

The gnawing would just get worse and worse, until it became him, and he would consume himself. His fingers would go first. He would eat himself, and then where would he be? These walls. This cave. The bones. Food was his life energy. He would just continue, without energy, in the emptiness, forever, motionless, silent, gnawing. No flesh to chew on. Just the mouth hole of a vanished man. The spirit of the cave. He decided not to think these troubling thoughts anymore. All they did was frighten him. Frightened or not, he would find help. He would eat. He would live. He must believe this to feel better. He must believe that it was good. Believing in the good kept the cave good. 

It was as though his heart turned as he pondered. Whatever this place was, it was all about him. It was all about his goodness. It was a gift, just for him, but it was also a test. The spirits were watching him. Whenever he had disobeyed them, evil had come, and only his suffering cleansed it.
