## CHAPTER TWO

Light filled the man's nest area a third time since he had last fed, emitting from the walls and ceiling, revealing the cave's gentle color almost like the man's own tongue. Filled with determination, he went into the play area and thought as long and hard as he could, until there was no more thought possible, about some way to give a kindness to the spider. He could not feed her. He could not teach her. She only came because he wanted her.

But then, perhaps not. He wanted her now. He could not remember why she had come to him, or where it had started. It seemed that, as far back as he could remember, he had been drinking the thick, chunky fluids from the little soft organ on the bottom and back of her body. He had lived in his nest bed. She fed him, and then she had taught him to clean himself, and sang her many words that he could also make.

At last, she scampered slowly into view, and was met with his beaming expression. He dared not get up, but simply waited for her to sense the room, and him. After a moment, he turned away and covered his face, admitting his shame to her. In response, she glided rapidly toward him, and climbed onto his arm and began caressing his skin. He lay back, and the feeding began without hesitation. Her body leaned into his forehead, and the mouth part for her feed organ arched in toward his mouth, dripping with translucent fluid.

He sucked down the chunky substance greedily, swallowing enormous gulps, chewing and swishing it with his tongue. The spider cooed. 

When finished, she cuddled her body against his cheek, folding her smooth, segmented legs around his neck and shoulders. He felt a great warmth, and resolve, and he began to cry again. The spider arched up, anticipating a tantrum perhaps, but after a moment, settled back into him, and he gently stroked her twisted legs between his fingers. There was a familiar sense, then, the sense of a new lesson coming. He looked askance at the spider's limp figure.

"Sorry," she said, for the first time, the sound of some internal parts clicking and whining. And he said it back.

***

They returned to the playroom with a new spirit. In his mind, in his vision, he could already see what was to happen, although the only part he was sure of was that he was to learn letters. The spider was also tireless, springing and gyrating in response to his successes, and making a low groan when he said the wrong letter. A strange thing happened, where as he became able to remember each letter, there was a growing certainty, a recognition, that "Aye" meant A - that this was a small part of the magic of the world. The sound he made truly *was* the symbol on the wall.

After an excited, raving rest in the unwelcome darkness, and in the following day, the spider knew his excitement and arrived from one of the folds of the cave as soon as he had cleaned himself.
Their companionship had become fearless, but the excitement had only begun. Soon, he learned that the letters not only meant sound, but they had been arranged on the wall so that, if you said the letters from left to right, you would make the sounds of words.

He had shrieked with disbelief and almost fear the first time it had happened. "Esse-Elle-Ee-Ee-Pee," and he was able to pick up the correct part of the sound, until at last, it flooded his heart and erupted as practically a scream, "SLEEP!" He rolled on the floor, giggling, as the spider danced beside him.

He wanted to rush straight to the letters in the other room, but he knew he would not be able to remember it all yet. They labored on, the man reading each word from the play room wall, nearly all of them forming the same sounds that the spider had taught him. The words on the wall now proclaimed themselves to him, thier wisdom, their secrets. A strange new power was rushing through him, animating his world with meaning. 

There were several words on the wall that he did not know, and the spider was unable to help with those. At long last, when his voice felt rough from reading and shouting, he was able to look at the wall, and it was as though he no longer saw the letters, he simply saw the words. Heard them, even. These words were the silent thoughts of the cavern, and as it spoke through the things and actions inside it, there could only be words enough for things, and things enough for words. The cavern's spirit had brought forth himself, and the spider, and now it whispered in symbols on the surface of its essence. He beamed at the spider with a pride like he had never felt before. 

However, after the moment passed, the spider began acting strangely. She reared back and lifted her front legs at him, as though trying to fight him off, or get his attention. When she seemed contented that his eyes were locked on her, she gave a brief pause, and then said, "clothes." He puzzled over this for a moment, then she danced around like she did when she had another word to say. He again looked into her many little eyes, and she made a sound he'd never heard before. "Anthony."

There was a heaviness to that word. A sinking in the pit of his stomach. The first word, he knew. When he took things in the play room and wore them on his body, the spider said, "clothes." Hesitantly, he looked around the playroom. The spider began climbing into the piles of materials, frantically scuffing certain materials with his many legs. Indeed, when the man lifted up the item, it was perfectly shaped to fit on his body. Not just to wrap around, like he had done before. He could climb into this "clothes" and it would fit snugly on his body. There were many items nestled among the play room materials - some like tubes to fit over the feet, or hands, or top of the head. Most were for the top or the bottom of the body, but some were like a tight-fitting blanket. Some were very tiny, and seemed shaped to only cover up his butthole.

As he marveled over more clothes, climbing inside of them, feeling their material like a second set of skin over his own, it seemed as though the spider was already ahead of his thoughts. In time, and with much dancing and speaking, the spider had the man fully clothed, and as he began to disrobe, the spider said, "No."

The man wondered why. Perhaps the spider was being playful, but again, he began to remove an item, and again, the spider said, "No." It was irritating how she always seemed to know things that he didn't, but he remembered how he had gotten angry before. He could not lose her now. He would keep the clothes on. She seemed to shudder with relief when he acquiesced.

It was time. He could practically remember the letters in that third room. He shot a meaningful glance at the spider. He wasn't sure what to say, so he settled with, "sorry," and then made his way towards the third room. The spider traced behind him, but as usual, stopped before the third cavern. He turned back and looked at her, hard, for a moment, having a strange sense almost as though he were dreaming. As though none of this was real. And something else was obvioiusly real. But then the feeling was gone.

"Anthony," the spider repeated, then slipped away into the shadows, seeming to drag her long, chaotic shadow behind her.

What the word meant, she would not say. She just climbed all over him and got excited when he said it, until finally he had given up. It could be a warning. She might have been saying not to come in here, to do the thing he must do. As he came to the word, it looked, of course, exactly how he had remembered it. He had not forgotten the shapes of the letters. It was as though he hadn't believed it until he stood right before it. He checked again, sounding it out.

"Aye-En-Tee-Ache-Oh-En-Wye." It wasn't perfect, but he knew the word. In some words, the H letter would change the way the T sounds. "Anthony," he said. And then he nearly fell over backward, as the wall slid or rolled to the side, into a fold in the cave wall, and a new opening stood before him. He sniffed the air, but there was no new smell. The opening had exposed an upward shaft, and a series of bars extended up into it. These bars seemed as though they were intended for him to be able to grip them, and he could climb up.

He glanced back towards his nest, knowing the spider would not return before the next light period. 

His mind flooded with possibilities. It had all been designed this way, and now was the time to see. He began his climb, up the long shaft, and paused to look down, the dim ground passing five body lengths beneath him. At last, he made it to the rim and peaked over, into a cavern of a width he had never seen before. There was a flash of amazement, but this was overtaken by panic. His heart lurched, and his body went numb with panic. For only an instant, he could not recognize what he was seeing.

In this moment, like the many times he had stood over that sacred object in the third room, which had shown him his face. He had seen his own startling features, with shock. But this face, this face right before him, was not his face. It was another. He only saw it for a moment, completely stunned, as it rushed towards him, and there was a loud sound, a "whomp!" that jarred his entire world. In this moment, fragments of many thoughts raced into his head, and he saw with instantaneous recognition, a great many things. He had been struck, bashed - he didn't see what with. His arms had rushed up to defend him, but that released the climbing bars, and he tumbled backwards and down against the impact on the top of his head. He flailed his arms, and endless hole giving way beneath him as he smashes into the walls as though in a dream, seeing colors rush past him, still comprehending the many things, but then his body thumped into a terrifying numbness, and he fell asleep.

***

It was confusing to Emma how the same word was both his name, and also the cudgel that Lin carried. He had used the Token again, binding its magic to his own, and she peered now over the ledge, into the hole. The body had immediately fallen after being hit, and lay sprawled on the floor below. Yet another person. Whether he was safe or not, they could not know. But his door had opened, and he had climbed out. Without thinking, Lin had struck the man. 

Emma would have done the same. She had lived safely with Lin in this area, and now some other was climbing into it. What had startled her worse, his skin was bright. He looked pale and sick, and this had worried them both. They had sat frozen until he came to the edge, wordless and grinning. The moment the club struck the intruder, Lin had doubled over backward himself, gripping his head and crying out. He lay on the ground, breathing heavily, squeezing his face with his hands, forcing his jaws into one another. He would hurt over the dark period, but she would sooth him. 

Just like with the spiders, there was a magic that poisoned the doer of violence. Lin bore this sacrifice each time, and she tended to him. He had learned this lesson with difficulty, but it had bettered him. He had thought to use her body, and when she told him no, he had continued after her. But in the moment that he had gripped her neck, trying to hold her down, so that he could have his pleasure without her want, his body had responded stronger than hers to his abuses. She laughed at him, and she left him. But he found her again, and told her that he would not do this again. He was her best hope. She would remain with him until she reached safety. Eventually, she had warmed to him, and he had softened, and now when they slept, he entered her, and they had a deep pleasure together.

They could no longer stay here. If the man in the hole woke up, he would climb again.

Nervously, she pulled the band out of her hair and began smoothing out the various layers. She glanced at Lin. As always, he had that stillness, ever asking for an opening. Lin was beautiful, and she was glad for his humor and protection. He gave a reassuring smile back, over the brink of the hole, and they both rose to a stand. They knew, worldlessly, that it was better to move on. They had met with others before, twice, and it was never safe. They always attacked. Emma and Lin had been running ever since that first encounter, when the others had tried to capture and imprison them.

Lin's token had secured their escape. He bashed the biggest one, and when that one went down, they rushed to help him. As Lin twisted in agony, Emma had dragged him away helplessly. Another woman had chased them through the caverns, throwing things and screaming, until finally they had crawled up into a loft in the ceiling and rested for many days. Lower down here in this depth, it seemed that many of the holes were nest areas just like she and Lin had emerged from. Trapped in this maze of caves, with new others emerging into it each light. There was no safety anywhere.

Lin nodded toward the hole, grinning with false bravery. "We could sneak. We could get this one's Token."

She flushed with appreciation, and almost considered it. "No. He might wake. We keep moving."

Lin considered a moment longer, then took Emma's smaller hand, and they stalked silently into the next wide corridor. They moved slowly, sniffing and listening, but it remained mostly silent. Some occasional noises seemed distant, or perhaps just the echoes of their own footfalls. They had learned to wear dark reds, grays, and purples. Lin wore a single garment that covered the top of his body and thighs, and a small pair of shorts beneath. In their long times of play, Emma had discovered that she could weave his hair together into rows, and this kept it low and out of his face. But when she let go, it all fell apart. The hair tie was her Token. It was the same word as her name, and so it must be for her.

The channels were long, with many divisions. Some sloped down, others up, and nearly all curved or twisted in some way. The caverns were mostly empty, but there were occasional entrances into odd rooms which they peered suspiciously into. These alcoves were bare, exposed, linking multiple cave paths together, and so it never felt safe to enter. Near one, they heard the sounds of a single person scrabbling off as they approached.

They moved slowly, avoiding sounds and instincts. There was no feeling, just holding the breath, and letting it out. Whatever would happen to them would happen. They would need to either find a place to rest, or risk returning to a safe nest.

At last, she whispered some words to Lin, and they decided to enter one of the alcoves. He stood by the entrance, as they had planned, and she floated in slowly. The room was extremely tall, still that pinkish-purple color, and she stood stunned for a moment staring up. The walls sloped up into a long tube, and at the apex, a transparent material was split into shapes of many colors, and a supernatural light flooded through these shapes. Momentarily blinded, she returned her sight to the surrounding alcove. It was a wide maze of thin walls, standing sometimes taller than her, and sometimes shorter, coming to natural crests of the squishy material that the entire cave seemed to be made of.

As she twisted between these strange walls, finally she padded into view of the center, beneath the solid colored beams from above. Startled, she saw a woman, kneeling on the floor, completely entranced by her activity. There was a square panel on a raised altar, and the woman was working away at the corners with something in her hand. A Token! 

Emma made no noise to alert Lin, but she kept herself mostly hidden in the walls. Something about this woman did not seem threatening, if she was alone. She seemed desperate. She twisted her wrists at the corner of the altar with her strange little tool, and all at once her head darted up and she glanced about in every direction. The moment she saw Emma, the woman flew backward, as if struck. She made no sound, but scrabbled in terror, looking like a spider trying to escape.

"No." Emma said quietly, and the girl twisted back, eyes wide, to regard her for once. Emma smiled. "Help." She gestured at herself, and repeated the word.

Lin's face had appeared in the room, assessing the woman's wide-eyed, silent writhing. He seemed to comprehend the situation with resigned suspicion, then grinned earnestly and stole back to scout the entrances. There was a long quiet, as the woman's breath stopped catching, and finally, she hoisted herself up, and repeated flatly, "help."

She held up the Token in her hand for Emma to see. It was a smooth, shiny pole with a handle, and it terminated in a cross-shaped tip. She returned to the altar and showed Emma what she had been doing. She could insert the end of her Token, called Tysha, into tiny pegs in the corners of a raised platform, and by twisting the pegs, it would raise or lower the corners. Emma marvelled at the Token, performing its magic. When finally, Tysha had adjusted each corner to exactly the height marked by a white line, it became possible to lift the entire piece out, and they were able to set it aside and look inside the altar. 

It was a block, with words on the front. As Tysha lifted the object out, it seemed to come apart, opening from one side and spilling out into countless thin, flat surfaces, as though the front of the object were repeated in countless iterations. But as the leaves fell opened, they rippled like soft cloth, and each was covered from top to bottom in letters and words. Emma gasped, causing both to stand in apprehensive alarm. With breaths held, it was only silence.

Emma's heart flooded with envy as Tysha gripped the book to her chest and started scanning the exits. She reached out to gently touch Tysha's elbow, and then squeeze it, allowing Tysha to see her face. Tysha's wide, expressive eyes bored into Emma, then towards where Lin was hidden, and finally seemed to resolve. "Help," she said. She pointed at herself, and then towards the opposite entrance to the alcove. Without time for consideration, she bounded off in the direction indicated, and Emma rushed to get Lin and continue after her. 

